---
title: "Chapter 2"
original_file: "Evolution of Constitution.odt"
converted_date: "2026-06-12"
tags: ['government', 'union', 'constitution', 'states', 'state']
subtopics: ['chapter']
---

# Chapter 2

### Indian Constitution and Federation

2.1. WHAT IS THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT established by the Constitution of India? Juristic opinion is divided in its answer to this question. "The Constitution of the Republic of India which came into force on January 26, 1950, has" says Mr. Wheare[	Federal Government, 4th Edition, pages 26-27.], "federal features though it does not in fact claim that it establishes a Federal Union." After discussing some of the provisions of the Constitution, the learned writer proceeds: "It seems clear that after allowing for the federal features of the Indian Union, it can only be concluded that the Constitution is ' quasi-federal.' "

2.2. This view has come in for criticism by Mr. Alexandrowicz[	 Constitutional Developments in India, pp. 158-159 and 169.] who observes : " The use of 'quasi' in legal terminology proved meaningful in exceptional cases only. For instance, in the expression 'quasi-judicial,' the addition of 'quasi' serves the purpose of indicating the application of judicial methods in administrative proceedings. It might. also be conceded that in the term 'quasi-legislative powers,' the additional 'quasi' proves helpful to justify and explain the delegation of legislative power to the executive. But in the expression ' quasi-federation,' the word ' quasi' hints at a deviation from the federal principle without indicating what kind of special position a particular 'quasi-federation' occupies between the unitary State and a federation proper"; and the learned author finally concludes: "India  is undoubtedly a federation in which the attributes of State-hood are shared between the Centre and local States. Instead of defining her by the vague term of 'quasi-federation,' it seems more accurate to exclude her from the category of administrative federations and to consider her federation with vertically divided sovereignty." The opinion of Sir Ivor Jennings[	 Some Characteristics of the Indian Constitution, page 1. 'Union State Relations in India, 1960.] that the Constitution of India is "a federation with strong centralizing tendency" approximates closely to this view." Shri Santhanam[	 Union State Relations in India, pages 8 and 12-13] is of the opinion that the Constitution is a federation but that in view of certain overriding powers which the Union has been given over the States it might be called a "Paramount federation". According to Shri Basu[	Basu, Constitution of India, 4th Edition, Vol.1, 1960, page 20.], "the Constitution of India is neither purely federal nor purely unitarian but is a combination of both. It is a Union or a composite State of a special type."

2.3. Another writer[	The Indian Journal of Political Science, 1954, p. 177.] takes the view that "whatever might have been the position at the drafting stage, or previous to that stage, the Constitution that emerged out of the deliberations of the Constituent Assembly of India in January 1950 is a definitely Unfederal or Unitary Constitution."

2.4. It is unnecessary to refer to the views of other writers as the opinions quoted above are typical of the divergent views expressed on the subject, which range from a description of the Constitution as federal at the one end, and to a characterisation of it as unitary at the other. To determine what the true character of the Constitution is, it is necessary to examine the provisions therein bearing on the question.

2.5. What are the essential features of at Federation? They are that there should be two Governments, Central and Regional ; that the sovereign power of the State should be divided between them and that each must be supreme in its sphere. The federal principle consists, it has been said, in " the method of dividing powers so that the general and regional Governments are each, within a sphere, coordinate and independent."[	Wheare, Federal Government, 4th Edition, page 10..]

A demarcation of the spheres of jurisdiction between the Centre and the States being of the essence of federation, it follows that there must be a Written Constitution, which is supreme. It is also necessary that disputes involving questions as to Whether the Centre or the State has acted within its jurisdiction or exceeded it should be justiciable and that for that purpose there should be constituted Courts which can adjudicate on such disputes.[	In re. Under Art. 143, Constitution of India, AIR 1965 SC 745, 1965 (1) SCJ 847.]

2.6. Now let us examine the provisions of the Constitution and see whether the requirements of a federation as stated above are satisfied. We have, firstly, the establishment both of a central Government and regional Governments in the States. The Central Government is called the Union Government. ChapterI of PartV deals with the Union Executive and ChapterII of PartV with the Union Legislature. ChapterII of PartVI deals with the executive in the States and ChapterIII in Part V1 with the legislature in the States. It may be noted that in the Constitutions of America and Australia, the powers of the Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary of the Central Government are defined, but there is nothing at all in them about the Constitution of the States. The significance of this will be considered later. What is material for the present purpose is that following the Canadian  model, our Constitution takes care to define the Constitution of the States and also of the Union. Both the Union and the States are distinct entities, deriving their authority each from the Constitution. To complete the picture, reference should be made to PartXI of the Constitution wherein the relations between the Union and the States, legislative and administrative are dealt with respectively in Chapters I and II. So, it is clear that under the scheme of the Constitution, the two Governments, central and regional are independent and that the latter are not administrative units subordinate to the former, and exercising authority as its delegate.

2.7. Then, secondly, is there distribution of legislative power between the Union and the States, such that each is supreme in its sphere? Article 246 of the Constitution which deals with this matter provides that the Union shall have exclusive power to legislate on topics mentioned in List I and the States 'on the topics mentioned in List II. That clearly and unequivocally embodies the essential principle of Federation. But then, it is said that the distribution of legislative powers actually made in the Constitution between the Union and the States is repugnant to the true principle of federation, in three respects:

(A) A law of the State with respect to the topics enumerated in List III is subordinate to that of the Union;

(B) the quantum of power allotted to the Union is so large that the Constitution must be said to be in substance unitary; and

(C) the grant of the residual power to the Union is inconsistent with the federal character of the Constitution.

These criticisms will have now to be considered.

(A)

2.8. As regards Concurrent List, Article 246 enacts that both the Union and the States have the power to legislate on topics mentioned in List III and Article 254 (1) provides that in case of conflict between the Union Law and State Law, on a topic included in List III, the former is to prevail. It is said that this provision offends the essential principle of federation, that the central and regional Governments should each be independent and supreme in its sphere. But this criticism fails to take note of the fundamental difference that exists between a law with respect to the topics mentioned in Lists I and II on the one hand and one with respect to the topics mentioned in List III on the other. The Union has the exclusive competence to legislate on matters mentioned in List I and is therefore supreme in the field covered by them. Likewise, the States have the exclusive competence to legislate on the matters mentioned in List II and are therefore supreme in the field covered by these. But the position is different as regards List III. It is not the exclusive field of either the Union or the State, and therefore the very foundation on which the supremacy of the Union or the State rests with respect to the topics in Lists I and II respectively, viz. exclusive legislative competence, is lacking. Therefore a conflict between a Union Law and a State law with reference to a topic in the concurrent list cannot be solved by the application of the federal principle of supremacy of each Legislature in its field. That is why the Constitution has made an express provision in Article 254 for settling the conflict.

2.9. It is significant that while in the case of such conflict, the Union law prevails under Article 254 (1), the State law will prevail under Article 254 (2) if it had been reserved for consideration by the President and had received his consent. This is inconsistent with any theory of supremacy of the Union. Moreover if, by reason of the distribution of powers under Lists I and II which are the exclusive fields of the Union and the State Legislatures respectively, the Constitution is a federation, how is the position altered because States are given, in addition, legislative powers of a limited kind over some. other field? The character of the Constitution cannot be affected even if the concurrent list had been wholly incorporated in List I giving only List II for operation by the State Legislature.

(B)

2.10. But then it is said that List I is very wide and comprehensive, that further the Union is in a dominating position as regards the topics mentioned in List III, that the topics that are left to the States in List II are a mere husk and that the distribution of powers between the Union and the States is thus a negation of the true spirit of federalism. According to Prof. Wheare:

".....the powers granted in the exclusive Union List and the concurrent list cover as in West Germany, almost all subjects of importance and what is left to the exclusive authority of the States tends to be of subordinate concern."[	Wheare, Federal Government, p. 27.]

This criticism again cannot be said to be well-founded on a number of reasons. As regards the importance of subjects allocated to the States, the Gwyer C.J. Observed:

"... I mention, only to dismiss, the argument that the new autonomy of the Provinces and the expenditure necessary to administer and maintain the vital services committed to their charge require that every intendment should be made in favour of the provincial taxing power. I should never deny the high importance of the provincial functions but the Centre has also great responsibilities though of another kind, and it is not for this court to weigh one against another"[	In re: the C.P. & Berar Act, 1938, (1939) FCR 18 at p. 44.]

In another case, he again observded about the powers of Indian Legislatures:

"We must refer to the fundamental preposition enunciated in the Queen v. Burah[	(1878) 3 App. Cas. 889, 5 IA 178.] that Indian Legislatures within their own sphere have plenary powers of legislation as large and of the same nature as those of (the British) Parliament itself. If that was true in 1878, it can not be less true in 1942. Every intendment ought therefore be made in favour of legislature which is exercising the powers conferred on it. Its enactments ought not to be subjected to the minute scrutiny which may be appropriate to an examination of the bye-laws of a body exercising only delegated powers, nor is the generality of its power to legislate on a particular subject to be cut down by arbitrary introduction of far-fetched and impertinent limitations."[	Bhola Prasad v. R., (1942) FCR 17 at p. 27.]

Therefore the the States in Free India, enjoying real and full autonomy in there respective sphere can not be said to be having , subordinate or unimportant or less useful functions or less than autonomous so as to conclude that the Constitution is not Federal in nature. Further, it is true that there is a large preponderance of subjects allotted to the Union Government. But whether a Constitution is a federation or not depends not on the quantum of power allotted to the centre or the regional Governments, so long as that is not illusory, but on whether they have exclusive authority in the fields allotted to them. Putting it differently, the point to be considered is whether "the local States enjoy the rights of real Parliamentary Government whatever the distribution of powers between them and the Centre.''[	Alexandrowicz, Constitutional Development in India, page 159.]

Moreover, a review of the topics assigned to the States does not warrant the conclusion that the power granted to them is negligible. Among the topics allotted to them, are Sales tax, Property tax, Local Government, Police, Agriculture, Education, Public Health, Mines, fisheries and the like and they are matters pertaining generally to local administration. The revenue generated by each State itself speaks about the extent of power of taxation conferred upon the States. There is therefore no reason to think that the legislative powers granted to the States are unsubstantial. It may be added that the subjects assigned to the Provincial Council of the States under the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1962, which succeeded the Union of South Africa, 1909, are practically the same as the above.

(C)

2.11. Then there is the criticism relating to the allotment of the residual power to the Union under entry 97 of List I. It is said that in a real federation, the Central Government must have only those powers which are delegated to it by the acceding States and that the residue must therefore be left with the latter. Support for this is sought in the provisions of the American and Australian Constitutions. Article 10 of the American Constitution provides that "the powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution nor prohibited by it to the States are reserved to the States respectively or to the people." Section 107 of the Commonwealth of Australia Act, 1900, which is .on the same lines as Article 10 of the American Constitution, is as follows:

"Any power of the Parliament of a Colony which has become or shall become a State shall, unless it is by this Constitution exclusively vested in the Parliament of the Commonwealth, or withdrawn from the Parliament of the State, continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth or of the admission or establishment of the State, as the case may be."

2.12. Now, is the vesting of the residual power in the States an essential requisite of a federation? If the federal principle consists in the division of legislative power between the central and regional Governments, each being supreme in its domain, it cannot affect the character of a Government as federal whether the residual power is lodged with the Centre or with the Regional Government. It; would therefore follow that if the Constitution is otherwise federal, the allotment of the residual power to the Union cannot alter its character as a federal Constitution. In this view Article 10 of the American Constitution must be considered to be not an essential feature of its federalism. Dealing with this question, Mr. Wheare observes[	Federal Government, 4th Edition, page 12.]:

"In my view this test of federalism (incidence of the residual power) concentrates on a relatively superficial characteristic of the American Constitution. The essential point is not that the division of powers is made in such a way that the regional Governments are the residuary legatees under the Constitution but that the division is made in such a way that whoever has the residue, neither general nor regional Government is subordinate to the other."

2.13. In this connection, it might be added that this Article was not in the American Constitution as adopted in 1787 but was introduced by the first Constitutional Amendment in 1791. Section I07 of the Australian Act, 1900 is open to the same remarks as Article IO of the American Constitution on which it is based.

2.14. In the Constitution of Canada, which in this respect, differs from that of America, residual power is given to the Government of the Dominion and not of the Provinces. Commenting on this, Sir Ivor Jennings observes that it is inconsequential "because some of the enumerated heads are so wide, as for instance, property and civil rights within the Provinces, that there is very little to fall in the residue. The more important characteristic of the Canadian distribution is that the two lists of powers have to be read together, the interpretation of one depending on the interpretation of the other."[	Some characteristics of the Indian Constitution. p.58.]

The position is the same under our Constitution, in which the Lists are even more detailed and extensive and the residue is practically notional.

2.15. To sum up, the conclusion that in view of the distribution of the power of legislation under Article 246, the Constitution must be held to be federal remains unshaken by the criticisms based on the supremacy of the Union legislature in the concurrent list or the quantum of powers distributed or the allotment of the residual power.

2.16. Then there remains the question of the existence of an independent judiciary for settlement of disputes arising in relation to the provisions of the Constitution. The Supreme Court established by the Constitution is, as already stated, the highest Court in the country and its jurisdiction is of the greatest amplitude. Article 131 confers on it jurisdiction to hear any dispute:

(a) between the Government of India and one or more States, or

(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other ; and

(c) between two or more States,

if and in so far as the dispute involves any question whether of fact or law on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends."

2.17. Moreover any person whose fundamental rights have been infringed can move the Supreme Court by writ under Article 32 for appropriate relief and the right to move the Supreme Court is itself a fundamental right. The High Court can also issue writs under Article 226 when the rights of a person are infringed by a law which is unconstitutional. If such a question is raised in the course of proceedings in the subordinate Courts, the High Court can, under Article 228, transfer the case to itself and decide the point. The decisions by the High Court on constitutional questions are open to appeal to the Supreme Court whether they are given in proceedings under Article 226 or under the ordinary law. Thus, the Courts are fully empowered to see that the Union and the State legislatures keep within the respective bounds prescribed for them by the Constitution.

2.18. If the question whether the Indian Constitution is a federation or not has to be decided solely on the above materials, there should be no difficulty in answering it in the affirmative. But there are in it other provisions and features which sound in unitarianism, and it is these that have come in for considerable criticism. They may be divided into two categories,

(A) those interfering with the supremacy of the States in the field of legislation under List II and

(B) those interfering with the exclusive powers of the State Government in the administration of their territories.

We may now proceed to examine them.

(A) Interference with the Legislative supremacy of the States:

2.19.  Articles 249, 252, 253, 352, 353 and 356 fall under this category.

2.20.1. Article 252 which is a reproduction of Section 103 of the Government of India Act, 1935, has been already discussed. It authorises legislation on a matter in the State List, only when two or more State Legislatures require it, and it cannot be said to infringe the supremacy of the States in what is their exclusive field. Article 253 might also be dismissed out of consideration as its operation is limited to implementation of Treaties, Agreements or Conventions with foreign powers. Article 249 confers on Parliament power to legislate on a topic in the State List when the Council passes a resolution in that behalf. This undoubtedly is an intrusion by the Union into the domain of the States. But then, it is to be noted that action can be taken under this provision only "in the national interest," which was stated in the debates in the Constituent Assembly to mean something which is more than of local importance, that is one having impact over the country as a whole. Can this provision be said to be repugnant to the federal character of the Constitution? When the subject matter of the legislation is one in which more than one State is interested, it would be convenient and expedient if there could be one legislation on it and not as many as there are States. And if the Union Legislature can move in the matter only if the Council passes by a majority of two thirds, a resolution to that effect, it is difficult to see how the supremacy of the State Legislature is infringed. Virtually, the Union Legislature will be functioning as the delegate of the States acting through their representatives in the Council. The law will be operative only for a limited period unless it is renewed by a further resolution. It cannot be said. that this provision is violative of the principle of federation. Article 352 gives authority to the President to issue a Proclamation of Emergency when the security of India is threatened by war, or external aggression or armed rebellion[	Substituted for 'internal disturbance' by Constitution (44th) Amendment Act.] and under Article 353, Parliament can then make a law conferring powers and imposing duties with respect to all matters including those which are not in List I. The Proclamation has to be laid before each House of Parliament and has to be approved by them within a specified period and the resolution may be revoked by a subsequent Parliament. This again is an exceptional power granted to the Union executive and legislature in times when the very life of the nation is in peril. It will be wholly unrealistic to think in terms of the distribution of powers between the Union and the State Governments, when there is a threat to the existence of all of them. There must be a wall before you can paint on it and there must be a Government in existence before it can function as a federation. It is to be noted that the Proclamation of Emergency has to be approved by the Parliament and it may be revoked by a subsequent Parliament. In other words, it is the people who have ultimately to decide whether an emergency has arisen necessitating the vesting of plenary powers in the Union Government and also when that emergency ceases. Being ex-hypothesi, an emergency power, it cannot be said to detract, from the otherwise federal character of the Constitution.

2.21. Then there is Article 356 which provides that the President may, when he is satisfied that the machinery of the State Government has broken down, issue a Proclamation assuming to himself all the executive powers of the State and vesting the legislative powers in Parliament. The Proclamation has to be laid before Parliament and approved by it and it will become inoperative after the lapse of a specific period of time unless there is a fresh resolution renewing it. This Article bears a close analogy to Article 352 and cannot, for the same reason, be held to be derogatory to the character of the Constitution as a federation.

(B) Interference with the Administrative power of the State

2.22. We may now pass on to consider the criticisms that some of the provisions and features of the Indian Constitution go against its federal character in that they interfere with the supremacy of the States in the administration of their affairs. These criticisms centre for the most part on certain features on which the American and Indian Constitutions differ. To understand the true significance of these differences it is necessary to know the historical setting in which the two Constitutions were evolved. There are two modes in which a federation can be formed. One is when States which are sovereign and independent enter into a pact by which they surrender some of their powers to a new Government to be established and that is what happened in America. The other is when a State which has a unitary Government decides to transform itself into a federal State and for that purpose, the provinces in the State are converted into autonomous units in a federation, and that is what happened in India. In America, there were originally 13 colonies of settlers from Great Britain. They were independent of each other but subject to the sovereignty of the British Government. Then they declared their independence and became sovereign States. Thereafter they entered into an agreement to constitute themselves into a Union of States, and as a result thereof, the Constitution of United States came into existence in 1787. Under this, the Central Government was given certain enumerated powers, the States otherwise retaining their sovereign powers. The course of events in India was different. Prior to the enactment of the Act of 1935, the British Indian Government was unitary with the Governor-General at the head of the administration, the Governors of the Provinces being subordinate to him. Then the Statutory Commission under the Chairmanship of Sir John Simon recommended the establishment of a federation and the process adopted for that purpose has already been described. The powers previously granted by the British Government to the several authorities were resumed andre-granted in part to the Centre and in part to the Provinces. Thus a federation was built on the foundations of a unitary State, As has often been said, while the American federation came into existence as the result of a pact between the acceding States, in India, it came from above. It is this difference in the birth of the Constitutions that accounts for most of the differences between them. We may now proceed to examine them.

2.23. (1) Constitution of Regional Governments: All federal Constitutions define the powers, legislative, executive and judicial of the central Government and the mutual relations of that Government and of the regional Governments. That is of the essence of a federal Constitution. The American Constitution stops there and so does the Constitution of Australia. But the Constitution of India proceeds further and defines the powers, legislative, executive and judicial of the State Governments as well, adopting in this respect the scheme of the Canadian Constitution. The reason for this is obvious. Prior to the Act of 1935 by which a federal Government was established, the British administration in India was unitary and had provided the governmental machinery for both the Centre and the Provinces. When, for the purpose of establishing a federation, the Act of 1935 resumed all the powers previously granted, the entire machinery of the government then existing stood scrapped, leaving nothing either for the Centre or for the Provinces. It became therefore necessary for Parliament to prescribe in the Act, a Constitution not merely for the Centre but also for the Provinces. To confine the constitutional provisions to the machinery of the federal Government and to its relations with the Provinces would be to leave a vacuum. This is also what was done when the British North America Act was passed in 1867. That Act defined the Constitution, not merely, of the government of the Dominions but also that of the Provinces. When the Constituent Assembly decided to replace the Government of India Act, 1935, by the present Constitution, it had also for the same reason to define the powers, legislative, executive and judicial of the Government of the States in the Constitution. It may be mentioned that under the Canadian Act, the Provincial Government was given the power to amend the Constitution while under our Constitution, it is only the Union Government that has the power to do it. But this difference does not affect the position as regards the point now under consideration.

2.24. In the judgement of the Judicial Committee[	in Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Australia v. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited, 1914 Appeal Cases 237], the opinion was expressed that while the Constitution of Australia was strictly federal, that of Canada can only be loosely said to be so. As the observations in question bear on the present question, it is necessary to examine them. The point for decision before the Judicial Committee was whether a law passed by the Commonwealth Government was intra vires of its powers and it was held that it was not as it did not fall within the ambit of the powers delegated to it by the Constitution under Section 51 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900. In the course of the judgment, Lord Haldane observed:

"In a loose sense, the word 'federal' may be used, as it is there (in the Canadian Constitution) used, to describe any arrangement under which self-contained States agree to delegate their powers to a common Government with a view to entirely new Constitutions even of the States themselves. But the natural and literal interpretation of the word confines its application to cases in which those States while agreeing on a measure of delegation, yet in the main, continue to preserve their regional Constitutions."

With respect, how does it affect the character of a federation which consists in the distribution of powers between the Centre and the States, each being supreme within its field, that the Constitution defines the powers of both the central and regional Governments? The criticism of Mr. Wheare[	in Federal Government, 4th Edition at pp. 12-13] that the criterion adopted in the above judgment of what constitutes a federal Government misses what is important and essential in the Constitution of a federation would appear to be well founded. To say that there can strictly be no federation if the Constitution sets up also a machinery for Regional Governments is to say that unitary Governments can never convert themselves into a federation. On the other hand if the constitutions of both the Central and Regional Governments are fully defined, many questions involving conflict of jurisdiction between them such as have arisen in the working of the Constitution of America would be avoided, and the working of the federation would be facilitated.

2.25. (2) Citizenship. In the American Law, a person born in the United States becomes automatically a citizen of the United States and also of the State in which he resides. That is so provided expressly in Article 14 Section I(1).  Article 5 of the Indian Constitution contemplates only one citizenship and that is of India and that is worked out in Section 3 of the Citizenship Act, which lays down the modes of acquisition of Indian citizenship. There is no question in this country of a person possessing a citizenship of the State as distinct from that of the Union of India. The doctrine of double citizenship is one peculiar to American jurisprudence. It has not been adopted by any other country having federal Constitution, not by Canada, and not by Australia, whose Constitution is very largely based on that of the United States and is strictly federal. It goes back to the times when States which were there to before sovereign and independent decided to establish a Central Government and to delegate to it certain powers and to retain the rest of them as sovereign. It is in this context that the concept of dual citizenship came to be recognized. Persons who were full-ﬂedged citizens of a State before the establishment of the Union became citizens  the Union Government with respect to the powers delegated to it but otherwise retained their citizenship of the State to which they belonged. Looking at the substance of the matter, the rights and obligations of the citizens in relation  the Central and Regional Governments will be regulated by the provisions of the Constitution and of the State laws, and that nothing will therefore turn on whether the subject has a single or double citizenship.

2.26. (3) Territorial integrity of the States: The Constitution has conferred on the Union Government power to make adjustments of the territories of the States. Article 3 which authorises this, is as follows:

"Parliament may by law—-

(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory in a part of any State ;

(b) increase the area of any State;

(c) diminish the area of any State;

(d) alter the boundaries of any State;

(e) alter the name of any State."

2.27. Now the criticism is that this provision has no place in a  federal Constitution because it is a fundamental principle of federation that the States should retain their sovereignty except as regards the powers delegated by them to the Central Government, that this involves that the territorial integrity of the State should continue unimpaired by any act of the Central Government and that Article 3 contravenes this principle. Support for this view is sought in the provisions of the American and Australian Constitutions. Article 4, Section 3 (1) of the American Constitution is as follows:

"But no new State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other State: nor any State be formed by the junction of two or more of the States or parts of States without the consent of the legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress."

The provisions of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900, bearing on this point are as follows:

Section 123. The Parliament of Common Wealth may with the consent of the Parliament of a State and the approval of the majority of the electors of the State voting upon the clause increase, diminish or otherwise alter the limits of the State upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed to and may with the like consent make provision respecting the effect and operation of any increase or diminution, or alteration of territories in relation to any State affected.

Section 124. A new State may be formed by separation of territory from a State but only with the consent of the Parliament thereof and a State may be formed by the Union of two or more States or parts of States but only with the consent of the Parliament of the States affected."

2.28. Under these provisions any alteration in the boundaries of a State can be made only with the consent of all the States concerned and not unilaterally by the Central Government. In this respect, the Constitution of India, clearly differs from that of America or Australia. The question is how this difference affects the character of the Constitution. We must once again turn to history for an elucidation of the true position. When the American Union was formed, the States which joined it had sovereign status and it is but natural that they should have insisted that their territorial integrity should be guaranteed. But in India, the Provinces were, prior to the Government of India Act, merely administrative units and there could be no question of recognising their territorial integrity as was done in America, as that is an attribute of sovereignty, and the Provinces in India had none. That is why the Government of India Act, 1935 which established a federation in accordance with the recommendations of the Statutory Commission expressly provided in Section 290(1) that

" Subject to the provisions of this section, His Majesty may by Order in Council—

(a) create a new Province;

(b) increase the area of any Province;

(c) diminish the area of any Province;

(d) alter the boundaries of any Province."

Article 3 of the Constitution is only an adaptation of this section.

2.29. In the light of the foregoing, the question can now be considered whether Article 3 is repugnant to the principle of federation? If the essence of federation is the distribution of legislative powers between the Centre and the regional Governments such that each is supreme in its sphere, the character and scope of such distribution cannot be affected by the territorial extent of the regional Government. The question of territorial integrity can arise only when federation is formed as the result of a pact between sovereign states. It has no place when a federation is formed out of a unitary state. It cannot therefore be regarded as an essential feature of a federal Constitution. Therefore Article 3 cannot be said to offend any principle of federation.

2.30.1. On the other hand, it has in practice tended to strengthen the federal element in the Constitution. During the British administration, the formation and growth of the Provinces were determined by commercial and political considerations. The East India Company established factories in Fort William, Bombay and Madras as they were well suited for their sea-borne trade. When the Company entered into the arena of politics and acquired territories, they were annexed to one or the other of the three settlements aforesaid and their administration was entrusted to them. That is the origin of the three major Presidencies. The Provinces continued to be constituted purely on grounds of convenience and that is expressly provided for in Section 52 of the Government of India Act, 1919. Adopting this provision, the Government of India Act, 1935, while establishing a federation, conferred by Section 290 (1), authority on the Government to readjust the territories of the Provinces.

2.30.2. During the debates on Article 3 of the Constitution in the Constituent Assembly, the point was raised whether a division of the Provinces on linguistic basis should not be adopted. The Assembly did not like to undertake such a vast project at that juncture. But they retained the powers to readjust the territories under Article 3. But the movement for establishment of States on a linguistic basis gained considerable momentum. In 1953, the State of Andhra was carved out of Madras and subsequently there was a comprehensive reorganisation of States under an Act of 1956, establishing more States on a linguistic basis. The Province of Gujarat was established in 1960 and quite recently the Province of Punjab has been divided into Punjab and Haryana. In the working of a federation, there are two forces operating which pull in opposite directions, one towards more and more centralisation and the other towards decentralisation, short of secession. It is only when both these forces are kept in check and a balance maintained between them that a federation can work successfully. There are several features in the Constitution tending in the direction of centralisation. Division of the States on a linguistic basis would operate as a powerful and wholesome check on them. Article 3 cannot therefore be said to be repugnant to the federal principle.

2.30.3. Thus Parliament's power to alter the boundaries of States without their consent even if is a breach of the federal principle, but as a matter of fact and practice, it is not the Parliament which has, on its own, altered the boundaries of States. By extra constitutional agitation, the States have forced Parliament to to alter boundaries of States. In practice, therefore, the federal principle has not been violated.

2.31. (4) Equality of States: In all the federal Constitutions, the members of the Lower House of the Legislature are elected by the people on the population basis. But as regards constitution of the Upper House, there is difference between America and India. In America, under Article I Section 3 sub-clause (1), each State sends to the Senate two members who were originally chosen by the Legislature of the States but after the enactment of the 17th Amendment in 1913, they are elected by the people of the States. Thus, the principle of the equality of the States in the Senate is one fundamental to the Constitution of America. Article 80 of the Constitution of India fixes the strength of the Council of States, Rajya Sabha, at 250 of which 238 are elected by the Legislatures of the States and 12 are nominated by the President. The fourth Schedule distributes the elected seats among the several States on a population basis, and the number actually allotted varies from 1 in States like Manipur and Tripura to 34 to Uttar Pradesh.

2.32. This provision has come in for strong criticism. It is said that it is a fundamental principle of federation that there should be equality among all the States and that therefore representation of the States in the Rajya Sabha not state-wise but population-wise is in contravention of this principle. It is also pointed out that this provision confers an advantage on the larger States over the smaller ones. It is said as against this that it would be more in accordance with the principles of democratic Government that the representation should be on the basis of population and that it would be real inequality to give equal representation to States which are unequal in their population. It is also pointed out that as regards election to the Lower House of the Legislature, it is on the basis of population and it cannot be said that the States have been treated unequally as regards this House. It should be remembered that the principle that the States should each have equal representation is a relic of the status of these States as sovereign prior to the coming into force of the Constitution of America in 1787, and there is no reason why it should be imported into our Constitution. It cannot affect the character of the Constitution as federal whether the representation in the Upper House is State-wise or population-wise. It may be added that while the Australian and Swiss Constitutions have followed the American precedent of giving equal representation to the States in the Senate, the Canadian Constitution has not adopted this principle, and our Constitution is in a line with that of Canada. Then again, it is said that the provision for nomination of 12 persons to the Rajya Sabha goes against the federal character of the Constitution. The number of persons to be nominated is I2 in a House of 250 and moreover, nomination is to be made for representing not the field of politics but Literature, Arts, Science and the like.

2.33. (5) Directions by the President to the State: Article 257 enacts that the executive power of the State is not to impede or prejudice the executive power of the Union and that the President might give directions to the States as regards the "construction and maintenance of means of communication declared in the direction to be of national or military importance," and "the protection of the Railways within the State." These are measures intended to protect the properties of the Union situate within the limits of the States and cannot be said to infringe the right of the States in their field. These measures only expressly provide for the contingency in which US Supreme Court had to read the power into the Federal Govt. in Debs case.[	In re: Debs, 158 US 564.] Article 360 authorises the President to issue a Proclamation of emergency when the financial stability or credit of India or any part thereof is threatened and empowers him to issue directions to the States, requiring reduction of the salaries of persons serving the State. It is also provided that money Bills and other Bills falling within Article 207 may be directed to be reserved after they are passed by the State Legislature for the consideration of the President. This is undoubtedly an intrusion into the domain of the States but that is an emergency power and is obviously intended to be used when there is a financial crisis which affects more than one State. Article 365 provides that if any State fails to comply with the directions given by the Union Executive under any of the provisions of the Constitution, the President might declare that the Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. The result of that is to attract Article 350. This is no doubt a drastic power but it is purely processual, its object being only to effectuate substantive power conferred in the other provisions of the Constitution.

2.34. (6) Common Services between the Union and the State:  In America, administration of the matters falling within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Union is entrusted to officers appointed by the Union and acting under its control. Likewise, administration of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the States is entrusted to officers appointed by the States and subject to their control. The two services are distinct and separate. Under the Indian Constitution also, Article 309 provides for distinct services for the Union and for the States. Entry 70 of List I confers authority on the Union Legislature to enact laws on "Union Public Services, All India Services and Union Public Service Commission." Likewise entry 41 in List II authorises the State to enact laws with reference to "State Public Services and State Public Service Commission." But there is not under the Indian Constitution the same impregnable wall of separation between them as in America. Article 312 authorises the Parliament to enact laws creating one or more All India Services and regulating the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed to that service, if the Council passes a resolution in that behalf by a majority of two-thirds. This Article also declares that the Indian Administrative Services and the Indian Police Services shall be deemed to be services created by Parliament under that Article. The object of this provision is clearly to ensure a uniform standard in the quality of administration all over the States, and it cannot be said to interfere with the authority of the States in their field as the Officers recruited will be subject to the respective authorities under whom they serve and their actions will be open to review by the Courts. In America, the dual system extends to the judiciary also. One hierarchy of Courts is constituted with the Supreme Court of United States at the top for dealing with disputes arising with reference to the Constitution and to the Federal Laws. And there is in the States another hierarchy of Courts with the State Supreme Court at the top for deciding disputes under the State laws. But in India there is one unified judiciary which has authority to decide questions arising under all laws whether of the Union or of the States. Starting with the Courts of the Civil[	Substituted for 'District Munsiffs and Subordinate'.] Judges at one end, we move on to the District Courts and then to the High Court in the States and at the top is the Supreme Court, which is the highest Court in the land, having jurisdiction of the widest amplitude. The judicial system in Australia is like that of America, of India. while that of Canada is on the same lines as those of India.

2.35.1. Article 148 enacts that the President shall appoint a Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall have authority to audit accounts for both the Union and the States. Like-wise, Article 324 authorises the President to appoint an Election Commission which is to be in charge of elections to Parliament and also the State Legislatures. It is said that these two provisions interfere with the supremacy of the States in the field of administration. Here again, as both the Comptroller and Auditor-General and the Election Commission have to act in accordance with the law whether of the Union or of the States and as they are subject to the jurisdiction of- the Courts in case of their acting in excess of their powers, it is difficult to see how any federal principle is infringed. It should also be noted that the Constitution expressly provides that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, and the Chief Election Commissioner should not be removed except in the manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court. Thus they will be independent of the executive.

2.35.2.An independent Auditor of the accounts of the Government only increases the efficiency. In its working the  Comptroller General has served as an alert watch dog for the nation. Very recently it caught abuse of power leading to discrepancy in allotment of government contracts pertaining to 2G wireless spectrum licences. So much so that an ex Minister is in Jail and many others are being prosecuted with Supreme Court keeping a vigil against any obstruction in the process.[	Shahid Balwa v. Union of India]

2.35.3. The need for independent Election Commission can not be under-emphasised by any Federal Govt. including America after the events which led to acrimonious dispute in 2000 over conduct of Presidential Elections.[	Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000) ] In India the Election Commission, apart from overseeing the conduct of elections also performs advisory function to the Governor to the exclusion of the council of ministers in the matters of disqualification of members of the legislature.[	Election Commission of India v. Dr. Subramanian Swamy, AIR 1996 SC 1810, 1996 SCC (4) 104 relying and reiterating Brundaban v. Election Commission, 1965 (3) SCR 53.]

2.35.4. The independence of Election Commission and Auditor leads the doctrine of separation of powers to another level which was not experimented by any other country, prior to India. Answering the question whether by reason of the existence of an All India Civil Service, a unified judiciary and a single citizenship, the Constitution should be called quasi-federal, Mr. Alexandrowiez[	Constitutional Developments in India. p.168.] observes :

"This and other arguments do not change one basic fact, namely, the existence and function of parliamentary and Cabinet Governments in the States."

2.36. To sum up, Article 246 confers on the Union and the States exclusive power to enact laws on the topics in List I and List 11 respectively and that is indisputably federation in its strictest sense. There are provisions and features which appear to militate against the federal character and make for unitarianism but closely examined, they are in the main not inconsistent with the federal principle. There are others which are undoubtedly inconsistent with the federal character of the Constitution but they are for the most part emergency measures and the true character of a Constitution should be decided not with reference to the provisions which operate when the very life and existence of the nation is in peril but when the Government is working under normal conditions. We are concerned in this lecture only with the question whether on the provisions of the Constitution, it is a federation. Whether in its working it has observed the federal principle is a different question and that will be considered in the next lecture.
