---
title: "Chapter 4"
original_file: "Evolution of Constitution.odt"
converted_date: "2026-06-12"
tags: ['ministers', 'president', 'constitution', 'minister', 'house']
subtopics: ['chapter']
---

# Chapter 4

The Constitution and Conventions.

4.1. CONVENTION HOLDS a prominent place in the Constitutional law of England. It was evolved in the process of transition from a monarchical form of government to a democratic parliamentary form of government, with the Crown as its nominal head. It is not in writing. It has to be gathered from practice and precedents. It is not justiciable. Its characteristic features have thus been described by Freeman[	Freeman, Growth of the English Constitution, first Edition, pp. 109-110.] in a passage which has become classic: "We now have a Whole system of political morality, a whole code of precepts for the guidance of public men, which will not be found in any page of either the statute or the common law, but which are in practice held hardly less sacred than any principle embodied in the Great charter or in the Petition of Rights. In short, by the side of our written Law, there has grown up an unwritten or conventional constitution". According to Mr. Dicey[	Dicey, Law of the Constitution, Ninth Edition, pp, 422-423.], the conventions are "all or most of them rules for determining the modes in which the discretionary power of the Crown (or of the Ministers as servants of the Crown) ought to be exercised." But according to Sir Ivor Jennings and that is the opinion now generally accepted, they are not limited to the prerogative powers of the Crown. They are of wider amplitude and provide for the working of the machinery of Government in all its aspects, co-ordinate "the policy and the action of the Departments, and produce unity in the Constitutional system"[	Jennings, The Law and the Constitution, Second Edition, p. 88.].

4.2.1. What is the place of Conventions in the Constitutional Law of India? Our Constitution is in writing and is elaborate and comprehensive. Therefore one might be inclined to think that there is no place for conventions in it, and that we should not import them into it. But that will be an erroneous view to take of the matter. Many of the provisions of the Constitution relating to the working of the governmental machinery are taken from the Government of India Act, 1935, and conventions had a place in the working of that Act. Before the Parliamentary Committee which drafted that Act, it was proposed that the relations between the Governor-General and the Ministers be defined in the Act but it was decided not to do so, as that would be imposing statutory obligations on the Governor-General, and so the matters were left to be decided according to conventions. These conventions were expected to develop in the course of time and similar expectations were raised by the Constituent Assembly while drafting the Constitution. Following observations are apt in this regard:

"….......We have woefully failed to build up healthy constitutional traditions and have proved ourselves alarming inefficient in self discipline as far that matter in any other type of discipline. The power of self discipline is the very opposite of the fatal annoyance of power which confidently asserts that whatever is technically possible is licit. We need to build up salutary conventions to preserve our nation from the tamper which hardens the heart and perverts the understanding. Decency in public life is the only solution if we are to preserve the true spirit of democracy and not be left merely with the task of comatose constitution. We are faced with the stark alternatives of either 'dharma' in public life or the twilight of Indian democracy " [	Nani Palkhiwala in "We the Nation" quoted with approval in State v. H.E. Governor.]

4.2.2  Thus when the question of the powers of the President under the Constitution are discussed, there was a proposal before the Constituent Assembly to embody the conventions in writing but that was eventually dropped, with the result that conventions have continued to operate as before as binding usages. We may now proceed to examine the more important among them.

1. The President.

4.3. The Articles of the Constitution bearing on the powers of the President are 53, 74 and 75. They are as follows :

" 53(1) The Executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.''

XX 	XX 	XX

" 74(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions."

XX 	XX 	XX

" 75(1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.

(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People."

4.4 A reading of the above Articles must leave the impression that the powers of the President under the Constitution approximate to those of the President under the American Constitution, rather than to those of the Crown in England. The executive power of the Union is vested in him; the Ministers hold office during his pleasure, and the functions of the Council of Ministers is to aid and to advise him. Indeed the opinion has been expressed that if a President is not content to be a nominal head and takes upon himself to assert his own authority there is nothing in the Constitution which can operate as a legal bar[	A. Gledhill, Republic India, 1951, p. 108.]. No doubt it has been stated in answer to this that Article 78 speaks of " decision " of the Council of Ministers, and that that signifies that the President is only a titular head. But then the " decision " in that article is that of the Council of Ministers and' it will become a decision of the Union Government only when the President accepts it and the point in dispute is whether he is bound to accept it. So, then, the question for consideration is Whether the President under the Indian Constitution is the head of a Parliamentary form of Government as in Great Britain, or of a Presidential form of Government as in America.

4.5.1. The American Constitution is based on the concept of separation of powers which then dominated the field of political thought. Articles 1, 2 and 3 vest the legislative, the executive and the judicial powers in the Congress, the President and the Supreme Court respectively. The members of the Congress are all elected by the people and so is the President. The three organs are each supreme in its field. Thus, the office of President in America carries with it immense power and prestige. Conflicts between the Congress and the President are not a mere theoretical possibility as the history of America shows, and this is considered to be one of the weak points of the American Constitution. On the other hand, the Government of Great Britain does not recognise the rigid separation of powers which is the keystone of the American Constitutional structure. It is unitary in character. The political sovereignty vests with the people, and the legal sovereignty with the Legislature, and the King is its nominal head. As between the two Houses, it is the House of Commons that has the dominant voice. The difference between the two forms of Government have been lucidly brought out in the following passages:

"Under the Presidential system the effective head of the national government is elected for a fixed term. He is (practically) irremovable. Even if he proved inefficient, even if he becomes unpopular, even if his policy is unacceptable to the majority of his countrymen, he and his methods must be endured till the moment comes for a new election. He is aided by ministers, who however able or distinguished, have no independent political status, have probably had no congressional training, and are by law precluded from obtaining any during their term of office. …....Under the Cabinet system everything is different. The head of the administration, commonly called the Prime Minister is elected for the place on the ground that he is the statesman best qualified to secure the support of a majority in House of Commons. He retains it only so long as that support is forthcoming. He is the head of his Party. He must be a member of one or other of the two Houses of Parliament; and he must be competent to 'lead' the House to which he belongs".[	Introduction to Bagehot, English Constitution, World's Classics. 1958 Edition, pp. VIII and IX.]

4.5.2. It however needs a caveat here that in Indian Parliamentary system, it is not necessary that Prime Minister should be a member of any house of Parliament but he/she is enjoined o become a member within 6 months of taking over his/her office. Precisely on the ground that permitting such persons to be appointed Ministers at the Union or State levels would "cut at the very root of democracy", an amendment to draft Constitution was moved to provide: "No person should be appointed a Minister unless at the time of his appointment, he is elected member of the House:" which amendment was spurned by Dr. Ambedkar in the following words:

"Now with regard to the first point, namely, that no person shall be entitled to be appointed a Minister unless he is at the time of his appointment an elected member of the House, I think it forgets to take into consideration certain important matters which cannot be overlooked. First is this and it is perfectly possible to imagine that a person who is otherwise competent to hold the post of a Minister has been defeated in a constituency for 'some reason and which, although it may be perfectly good, might have annoyed the constituency, and he might have incurred the displeasure of that particular constituency. It is not a reason why a member so competent as that should not be permitted to be appointed a member of the Cabinet on the assumption that he shall be able to get himself elected from the same constituency or from another constituency. After all the privileges that he is permitted is a privilege that extends only to six months. It does not confer a right on that individual to sit in the House being elected at all. My second submission is this that the fact that a nominated Minister is a member of the Cabinet does not either violate the principle of collective responsibility nor does it violate the principle of confidence because he is a member of the cabinet if he is prepared to accept the policy of the Cabinet stands part of the Cabinet and resigns with the Cabinet when he ceases to have the confidence of the House, his membership of the Cabinet does not in any way cause any inconvenience or breach of the fundamental principles on which parliamentary government is based. Therefore, this qualification in my judgment is quite unnecessary."

At the end of the discussion, the Constituent Assembly rejected the proposed amendment.

4.5.3. Issue relating to the qualification of a non-member as Prime Minister has also been agitated before Courts and Supreme Court in several successive decisions[	Har Sharan Verma v. Shri Tribhuvan Narain Singh, Chief Minister, U.P., (1971) 1 SCC 616; Har Sharan Verma v. State of U.P. 1985 (2) SCC 48; Har Sharan Verma v. Union of India (1987) Suppl. SCC 310.

] have refused to follow the British convention and have held:

"The English convention that the Prime Minister should be a member of either House, preferably House of Commons, is not our constitutional scheme since our Constitution clearly permits a non-member to be appointed a Chief Minister or a Prime Minister for a short duration of six months. That is why in such cases when there is any doubt in the mind of the President, he normally asks the person appointed to seek a vote of confidence of the House of the People within a few days of his appointment. By parity of reasoning if a person who is not a member of the State Legislature can be appointed a Chief Minister of a State under Article 164 (4) for six months, a person who is not a member of either House of Parliament can be appointed Prime Minister for the same duration. We must also bear in mind the fact that conventions grow from longstanding accepted practice or by agreement in areas where the law is silent and such a convention would not breach the law but fill the gap. If we go by that principle, the practice in India has been just the opposite. In the past, persons who were not elected to State Legislatures have become Chief Ministers and those not elected to either House of Parliament have been appointed Prime Ministers. We are, therefore, of the view that the British Convention to which the petitioner has, referred is neither in tune with our constitutional scheme nor has it been a recognised practice in our country."[	S.P. Anand v. H.D. Deve Gowda, (1996).]

Thus there is nothing in the Constitution which would make the appointment of the Chief Minister and Minister, none of whom are the members of the State Legislature, illegal.[	Ashok Pandey v. K. Mayawati, (2007).]

4.6. Which of the two forms of government mentioned above should be adopted was a question on which the members of the Constituent Assembly were divided in their opinion. There were those who preferred the Presidential system. But the Constituent Assembly decided after a full debate to adopt the Parliamentary system, as this country had been trained in it during the British administration, and as it was better suited to the Indian conditions than the Presidential system, which carried with it the possibility of a conflict between the Legislature and the Executive. However it also embodied the principle of separation of power as regards Judiciary on one hand and Executive/Legislature on the other hand. Article 50 of Constitution also provides it as a directive principle to ensure this separation of power.

4.7. The form of the Government under the Indian Constitution came in for consideration by the Supreme Court in Ram Jawaya v State of Punjab[	1955 (2) SCR 225: AIR 1955 SC 549.], in which delivering the unanimous judgment of the Court, B. K. Mookerjee, Chief Justice observed:

"In India, as in England, the executive, has to act subject to the control of the legislature: but in what way is this control exercised by the legislature? Under Article 53(1) of our Constitution, the executive power of the Union is vested in the President but under Article 75, there is to be a council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advice the President in the exercise of his functions. The President has thus been made a formal or constitutional head of the executive and the real executive powers are vested in the Ministers or the Cabinet.

The same provisions obtain in regard to the Government of States. The Governor or the Rajpramukh, as the case may be, occupies the position of the head of the executive in the State but it is virtually the Council of Ministers in each State that carries on the executive Government. In the Indian Constitution, therefore, we have the same system of parliamentary executive as in England and the Council of Ministers, consisting as it does, of the members of the legislature is, like the British Cabinet, " a hyphen which joins, a buckle which fastens the legislative part of the State to the executive Part."

4.8.1. In interpreting the articles of the Constitution, therefore, it is necessary to have due regard to the fact that they embody the Parliamentary form of government. Taking up first Article 74(1), it provides for a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at its head. Article 75 enacts that the President shall appoint the Prime Minister, and that the other Ministers shall be appointed by him on the advice of the Prime Minister. But what are the rules relating to the appointment of the Prime Minister? The Constitution is silent on the question, and so resort has to be made to conventions to fill in the gap. In England, the choice of the Prime Minister is a matter which falls to be determined by the Sovereign in the exercise of his independent judgment[	Wade and Phillips, Constitutional Law, 6th Edition, p. 77.]. The convention is that the party who for the time being commands a majority in the House of Commons has in general a right to have its leader placed in office and the most influential of its leaders ought to be the Premier.[	Dicey, Law of the Constitution, p.421 quoting Freeman " Growth of the British Constitution".] This is also the convention in India. In the draft Constitution there was a clause that " in the choice of Ministers and in the exercise of his other functions under the Constitution, the President shall be generally guided by Instructions set out in Schedule III A"[	Constituent Assembly Debates, Vo1.X, pp. 268-270.]. That Schedule which was on the lines of Instruments of Instructions to the Governor-General, annexed to the Government of India Act, 1935 contained instructions to the President and it was provided therein that he should select a Prime Minister commanding a majority in the House of the People and then appoint on the advice of the Prime Minister, Ministers who will be in a position collectively to command the confidence of the House of the People[	Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, pp. 1141 to 1157. ]. During the debates in the Assembly there was a proposal that all the matters mentioned in Schedule III-A should be embodied in the Constitution[	Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, p. 1168.]. But it was eventually decided to drop the clause in the Draft Constitution as also the Schedule in question, with the result that the matters contained therein were left to be governed by conventions.

4.8.2. The President as well as the Governor exercises his powers and functions conferred on him by or under the Constitution on the aid and advice of his council of Ministers save in spheres where the Governor is required by or under the Constitution to exercise his functions in his discretion. The President or the Governor acts on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head in the case of the Union and the Chief Minister at the head in the case of State in all matters which vests in the executive whether those functions are executive or legislative in character. Neither the President nor the Governor is to exercise the executive functions personally.[	Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab,  AIR 1974 SC 2192, 1975 SCR (1) 814.]

4.8.3 Thus the President while generally be bound to act on the advice of the Council of Minister, he may disregard such advice if it is contrary to the express provision of Constitution expressly or impliedly bar considering such advice. As example reference may be made to Article 85 regarding prorogation of House[	State of Punjab v. Satpal, 1969(1) SCR 47: AIR 1969 SC 903 at 911.], article 103 of the Constitution which provide that President/Governor should act on the advice of Election Commission and Article 217(3) regarding determination of age of the Judge of High Court, in consultation with Chief Justice of India.

4.9. As regards the other Ministers, while there is a provision in Article 75 (1) as to their appointment, there is none as regards their dismissal. That is as a matter of convention primarily a question between them and the Prime Minister. When there is disagreement between the Prime Minister and any Minister, the practice is for the latter to resign, and if he does not do that, the Prime Minister can move the President to dismiss him. The English convention on this matter has thus been stated:

"In fact, overt dismissal has not occurred in this country. The normal procedure is resignation, but it is obvious that some resignations are made at the request of the Prime Minister, an action which is dismissal in everything but name. Normally the Prime Minister need not fear that the Minister who is requested to submit his resignation will fail to do so. There is a tradition, a kind of public school fiction that no minister desires office but that he is prepared to carry on for the public good. That tradition implies a duty to resign when a hint is given".[	Carter, "The Office of the Prime Minister".]

4.10.1. Article 75 (3) enacts that the Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People. This is a statutory enactment of a Well-established convention in England that "the Cabinet are responsible to Parliament as a body for the general conduct of affairs."[	Dicey quoting "Government of the English Constitution", Law of the Constitution, p.420.] One consequence of the collective responsibility of the Council of Ministers is that there can be a motion of no-confidence only against the Council of Ministers as a body, and not against any individual Minister, though it is the act of one of them that gives rise to the motion. Our Constitution has made a departure from the British Conventions about the right of Minister to address the Parliament. In England a Minister can address only that house of which he is a member. Article 88 & 177 of our Constitution provide that a Minister can address either houses of Parliament but can vote only in that house of which he is a member.

4.10.2. The Indian Constitution establishes a Parliamentary system of Government with a Cabinet, and not a Presidential form. Article 75(3) brings into existence responsible Government, that is, the Council of Ministers must enjoy the confidence of the House of the People. In the context, it can only mean that Art. 75(3) applies when the House of the People does not stand dissolved or prorogued, for, when it is dissolved, the Council of Ministers cannot naturally enjoy the confidence of the House. But such dissolution of the House does not require that the Prime Minister and other ministers must resign, or cease to hold office or must be dismissed by the President, because, Art. 74(1) is mandatory and the President cannot exercise his executive power without the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers, with the Prime Minister at the head.[	U N Rao v. Indira Gandhi, 1971 Supp SCR 46: AIR 1971 SC 1002.]

4.11. Another consequence of this collective responsibility of Council of Ministers is that the act of any one of them is the act of all of them. Every Minister is imputed constructively with the knowledge of the acts of others. It is against established convention that any Minister should in public disclaim knowledge of the acts or policies of any other Minister, much less take to criticising them. The proper occasion for a Minister to express his individual views is in the Cabinet meeting, and if he does not agree with its decision, the right course for him to adopt is to resign. And if he does that he is entitled to make a statement on it in the Legislature, but not to ventilate his grievance or explain his viewpoint before the Public. It must be said that while these conventions are observed scrupulously by the British politicians, there is not the same strict compliance with them in this country, it being not unusual for the Ministers to speak in different voices in the public. It is desirable that our politicians should have a better understanding of Parliamentary practice and conventions and observe them.

4.12. In England, the dissolution of Parliament before the expiry of its normal period is considered to be a matter on which the sovereign can exercise his independent judgment. Normally, it is the Prime Minister who has the choice, and the Crown has to accept it. But if the party in power breaks up, a situation might arise in which the Crown will have to exercise its own judgement independently of -the Prime Minister.[	Wade and Phillips, pp. 78-79.] The practice in India has in general been on the same lines and has thus been stated:

"Where the ruling party has a large majority and stands united behind its leader, he (the President) has to function as a mere Constitutional head. But, if the majority is small or the ruling party is in actual minority, but the Government is carried on with the active or passive support of one or more opposition groups, the President's position becomes automatically stronger. He will be able to advice with effect and, if necessary to refuse to approve important decisions, forcing the Government to resign and ask for a dissolution or let the President install an alternate Ministry. Similarly if dissensions within the ruling party become acute and the leadership breaks down, the President may become the deciding factor."[	Santhanam, Conventions and Proprieties of Parliamentary Democracy in India, p. 12.]

4.13. There have been however instances in which, when the party in power had lost the confidence of the Legislature, the Governor or the Rajpramukh, instead of dissolving it and ordering fresh elections recommended that action be taken under Article 356 and President's rule was established. Such a course is clearly in contravention of the well-established conventions in the matter, and is unconstitutional. This matter has been dealt with in the previous lecture.

4.14. These are the more important conventions relating to the working of the Cabinet system. The picture that emerges on a reading of articles 53, 74 and 75 in conjunction with the established conventions stated above, is that of a President who is the constitutional head of a Parliamentary form of government like the Crown in Great Britain and not of one who is the head of a powerful executive like the American President. That accords with what was intended by the Constitution makers, when they decided to adopt the Parliamentary system and not the Presidential system.

2. The Governor.

4.15. The powers of the Governor under the Constitution are similar to those of the President. Article 154(1) provides that "the executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution." Article 163 (1) provides that

"there shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advice the Governor in the exercise of his functions except in so far as he is by or under the Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion."

Article 164 relating to the constitution of the Council of Ministers is as follows:

"164(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:

(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the States."

4.16. It will be seen that these provisions are a replica of Articles 53, 74 (1) and 75 (1) and (2). The conventions applicable to the President will also be applicable to the Governors. It was expressly stated in a note laid before the Constituent Assembly that the words " aid and advice " in Article 163 meant that the Governor will in general act on the advice of the Ministry and that in the appointment of the Ministers and in his relations with them, he will be guided by the conventions as set out in the Schedule.[	Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. IV, p. 596.] As in the case of the President, so in the case of Governors, the conventions to be observed by them were set out in a Schedule. But after some debate, it was decided to drop the Schedule thus leaving the unwritten conventions to operate in the field. Conformably to this, it was explained in the Constituent Assembly that the words " shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor " meant that the Ministers will hold office as long as they command a majority in the House and that the Governor can neither withdraw his pleasure from a Ministry which enjoys the confidence of the House, nor can he save a Ministry which has lost the confidence of the House by the continuance of his pleasure.

4.17.1. But there are certain differences in the Constitutional position of the President and of the Governor which have to be noted. The President is elected; the Governor is appointed by the President. The point was raised during the debates in the Constituent Assembly whether the Governor should not also be elected. But it was decided that the office should go by appointment and there is good reason for this. The Governor occupies a dual position. He is the head of the State Government and in that capacity, he might be elected as are Governors of States in America. But he is also the representative of the Union Government, and as such has certain duties. Under Article 200, he can, in his discretion, reserve a Bill by the State legislature for consideration by the President. Under Article 356 he has to send a report to the President when the machinery of the State Government breaks down. These matters are under Article 163 (2) outside the jurisdiction of the Ministry in the State. In his capacity as representative of the Union Government, he has to be appointed by the President. As the Governor is only the Constitutional head of the State Government, like the Crown in England, there is nothing undemocratic or improper in his being appointed and not elected. That is how the Constitution has come to provide for the office of the Governor being filled by appointment.

4.17.2. There are many circumstances where the Governor has to act in his own discretion and unaffected by the advice of council of Ministers.[	Golak Behari v. State, AIR 1972 Orissa 1.]. An example is when there is to be a prosecution of the Chief Minister, tho Governor would, while determining whether sanction for such prosecution should be granted or not under section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, as a matter of propriety, necessarily act in his own discretion and not on the advice of the Council of Ministers.[	State of Maharashtra v. Ramdas Shrinivas Nayak, AIR 1982 SC 1249, 1983 SCR (1) 8 at 12.]Similar reasoning has been given in respect of a Minister as well:

"......a high authority like the Council of Ministers will normally act in a bonafide manner, fairly, honestly and in accordance with law. However, on those rare occasions where on facts the bias becomes apparent and/or the decision of Council of Ministers is shown to be irrational and based on non-consideration of relevant factor, the Governor would be right, on the facts of that case, to act in his own discretion and grant sanction."[	Madhya Pradesh Special Police v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2004).]

4.18.1. A question has been raised whether the appointment of a Governor by the President is a matter falling within Article 74. If it does, the appointment is virtually one made by the Union Government. If not, it is a matter on. which the President can exercise his own independent judgment. The practice has generally been. to treat it as one for the Union Government. The correctness of this practice has been doubted and with considerable justification. Whatever might have been the position, if the Governor was the representative of the Union Government and only that, there is the cardinal fact that he is the constitutional head of the State Government, and in that capacity, independent of the Union Government. Is it consistent with the federal character of the Constitution that the Union Government acting through the President should appoint the constitutional head of the States? So long as the same party is in power both at the Centre, and in the State for which a Governor has to be appointed, there may not be much of a problem. Suppose one party is in power in the Centre, and another in the concerned State, will it be right or proper for the Centre to appoint a person of its own party as Governor? It is true that a Governor whatever the party to which he belongs, is considered to be above all parties. But the proper thing should not merely be done but must seem to be done. It was not long ago that there was widespread criticism that a Governor had used his office for canvassing for his party. It would seem therefore necessary to develop a convention that the person to be appointed as Governor should be a non-party man, and that is a good ground for leaving the appointment to be made by the President in the exercise of his individual judgment.

4.18.2. It is however beyond dispute that the Proclamation issued under Article 356 is subject to judicial review. The debate is confined essentially to the scope of judicial review or the area of justiciability in that sphere. It does appear that the area of justiciability is narrow in view of the nature of that power and the wide discretion which inheres in its exercise.[	S.R. Bommai v. Union of India (1994)]

3. Legislature and Judiciary.

4.19. The evolution of conventions regulating the relations between the Legislature and the Judiciary in England forms one of the most fascinating chapters of Constitutional Law. The House of Commons claimed that as a sovereign body it had certain privileges, that it was the sole and exclusive judge thereof, and that accordingly when it committed a person for contempt of its authority, the Court had no jurisdiction to enquire into its validity. The Judiciary claimed on the other hand that it had the jurisdiction to decide the question as to the existence and extent of the privilege and that if a citizen had been committed under an illegal order, it had jurisdiction to set it aside. This conflict extended over several centuries but latterly, the two organs have come to a tacit understanding to respect the jurisdiction of each other, and accordingly a convention has been developed which is thus stated in May's Parliamentary Practice:

"Since the House of Commons has not for a hundred years refused to submit its privileges to the decision of the Courts, it may be said to have given practical recognition to the jurisdiction of the courts over the existence and extent of its privileges. On the other hand, the courts have always, at any rate in the last resort, refused to interfere in the application by the House of any of its recognised privileges."

The understanding has also been reached that no new privileges should be claimed by the House.

4.20. Turning now to the law; in this country, the relevant provisions of the Constitution bearing on this question are Article 105, 121 and I22, relating to the Union Legislature and they are as follows :

"Article 105 (1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament.

(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.

(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the members and the Committees of each House, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and, until so defined shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom and of its members and committees at the commencement of this Constitution.

(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of the Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or any Committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of Parliament."

"Article 121. No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the Judge as hereinafter provided."

"Article 122 (1) The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of these powers."

The corresponding articles relating to the State Legislatures, Articles 194, 211 and 212 are in the same terms.

4.21. The scope of the privileges conferred by these articles has been the subject of consideration in two decisions of the Supreme Court, M. S. M. Sharma v. Krishna Sinha[	1959 Supp (1) SCR 806, AIR 1959 SC 395.], and In re. under Article 143 of the Constitution of India[	AIR 1965 SC 745: 1955 (1) SCJ 247.]. To understand the true position aright, it is necessary to take note of the differences in the constitutional setting in which the conventions were evolved in England and the basic features of our Constitution. In England, the Parliament is supreme and therefore no question of the validity of any law enacted by it can arise. But in India, it is the Constitution that is supreme, and the three organs, the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary all of them derive their powers and jurisdiction from it. PartIII of the Constitution confers certain rights on citizens, and any law which violates these rights is unconstitutional and void, and it is justiciable. Under the Constitution, the citizen has a right to move the Court for redress when a law invades his fundamental rights, and the Court is bound to give him relief if that is established. Then again, there was a time in England when the House of Commons functioned as the Supreme Judicial body and that is how it came to be regarded as a superior Court of Record. The power of the Houses to commit for contempt would appear to be attributable to its character as a supreme judicial authority. But in India, though the doctrine of separation of powers has not been rigidly adhered to, the Legislature does not function as a judiciary and that will be seen from the fact that the Constitution has treated the three organs as distinct and independent entities and defined their constitution and powers separately.

4.22. Now proceeding on to the two decisions of the Supreme Court in which the scope of the privileges and immunities under Article 194 have been discussed, in M S. M. Sharma v Sri Krishna Sinha the publisher of a newspaper in Patna, called the Searchlight, was summoned by the Secretary of the Bihar Legislature to appear before the Committee of Privileges to answer the charge that he had published an incorrect report of a speech made in the Assembly and had thereby committed a breach of privilege. He moved the Supreme Court under Article 32 for an order quashing the proceedings on the ground inter alia that it contravened Article I9(1)(a). It was resisted by the Assembly on the ground that the privilege claimed by it was one subsisting in England on the date of the Constitution, and therefore fell within Article 194 (1) and that Article 19(1)(a) had no application to a matter covered by it. The Supreme Court agreed with these contentions and dismissed the petition. But it held that if a law had been enacted defining the privileges as provided in Article 194(3), that would be subject to the provisions of the Chapter on Fundamental Rights.

In re. Article 143 of the Constitution, one Keshav Singh published a pamphlet, which was held by the legislature of the Uttar Pradesh to amount to a breach of privilege and he was accordingly committed for contempt of the House. On his behalf, a petition was filed before the Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court, under Section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code and Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the order of committal. The High Court passed an interim order granting bail, and pursuant to that Keshav Singh was released. Then the Assembly commenced proceedings in contempt against the Judges and the Counsel for the petitioner. A conflict having thus arisen between the Legislature and the Judiciary, the President, in the exercise of his powers under Article 143, referred for the opinion of the Supreme Court, the question whether the High Court was competent to entertain and deal with the petition of Shri Keshav Singh challenging the legality of the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him by the Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh for its contempt and for infringing its privileges." The Supreme Court answered that question in the affirmative. It agreed with the decision in Sharma's case that if a law were enacted defining the privileges of the Legislatures, it would be subject to the limitations prescribed in PartIII of the Constitution. As regards conventions which were in existence in England at the time of the Constitution, it held that such of them as were not peculiar to conditions in England as for example Petitions to the Sovereign, or acts of attainder, would vest in the Indian. Legislatures, but that the orders passed by them would not. be immune from scrutiny by the Courts; that it is open to the citizens who are aggrieved by orders which are in  contravention of their Fundamental Rights, to move the Courts for redress, as the right to do so it itself one of the fundamental Rights, and that therefore the convention in England that general or unspeaking warrants issued by the Housed' Commons were conclusive, and that the Courts could not enquire into their validity had no application to India. Discussing the scope of Article 194(1) and (2), the Supreme, Court held that the freedom of speech conferred by it was absolute but that their operation was limited to its exercise within the legislative chamber and also observed:

"In rendering our answer to this question which is very broadly worded, we ought to preface our answer with the observation that the answer is confined cases in relation to contempt alleged to have been committed by a citizen who is not a member of the House outside the four walls of the legislative chamber."

4.23. One conclusion which emerges clearly from the above discussion is that it will be unsafe to accept the English Parliamentary conventions as straightaway applicable to Indian legislatures without regard to the conditions which exist under the Constitution.

4.24. And one suggestion which occurs in the context of the two decisions aforesaid is that it is desirable that there should be Parliamentary legislation codifying the conventions which have vested under Article 105(3) and Article 194 (3) in the Legislatures of the Union, and the State Legislatures, respectively. It is after centuries of conflict that the House of Commons, and Judiciary in England have established a convention that they should recognise and respect their supremacy in their respective fields. In India Parliamentary government is still in its infancy. There are now 16 States, and conflicts like those which the Supreme Court had to pronounce on, in the two cases cited above, cannot be ruled out. A law codifying the privileges and immunities would be the best safeguard alike of the powers of the legislature and of the Fundamental Rights of the citizens.

4.25. And finally, it is necessary to refer to the conventions relating to the Speaker of the House. His office is one of high status and great responsibility. Though he is put up by, and selected from, a party, on his election as Speaker, he rises above all parties, and it is his duty to maintain the high traditions and the dignity of the House. This is what May says of his office:

" Confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker is an indispensable condition of the successful working of procedure, and many conventions exist which have as their object not only to ensure the impartiality of the Speaker but also to ensure that his impartiability is generally recognised. He takes no part in debate either in the House or in the Committee. He votes only when the votes are equal, and then only in accordance with rules which preclude an expression of opinion upon the merits of a question. Until recently at a general election, his seat was often uncontested, and when he vacates his office, he is usually created a peer and in any case always relinquishes his membership of the House."

4.26. Pandit Nehru eloquently summed up the position of speaker of the house as under:

"The Speaker represents the House of the People. He represents the dignity of the House, the freedom of the House and is the symbol of a nation's freedom and liberty. He occupies an honoured and free position and his office should be occupied by a man of outstanding ability and impartiality."[	On March 08,1958 while speaking on the occasion of unveiling the portrait of Speaker Bitthdbhai Patel in the Lok Sabha.]

4.27. The position of Speaker in Parliament of India is far more powerful than the Speaker of British Parliament or that of American Congress due to his powers to disqualify any member in accordance with Schedule X[	Schedule X was added to the Constitution by 52nd Amendment Act, 1985.] of the Constitution. The legal position in regard to Schedule X has been summed up:

"The Tenth Schedule does not, in providing for an additional ground for disqualification and for adjudication of disputed disqualifications, seek to create a non- justiciable constitutional area...... The Speakers/Chairmen while functioning under the Tenth Schedule exercise judicial power and act as Tribunal adjudicating rights and obligations under the Tenth schedule, and their decisions in that capacity are amenable to judicial review." [	Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu, 1992 SCR (1) 686, 1992 SCC Supl. (2) 651]

4.28. It is therefore necessary for the members on the one hand to maintain and assist the Speaker to maintain the dignity of the House unimpaired and on the other hand for the Speaker to avoid all actions which might raise a suspicion of his being in favour of a party, especially because of the quasi judicial functions, he may have to discharge.
