---
title: "Chapter 6"
original_file: "Evolution of Constitution.odt"
converted_date: "2026-06-12"
tags: ['power', 'constitution', 'under', 'amendment', 'article']
subtopics: ['chapter']
---

# Chapter 6

Fundamental Rights—Judicial Review—Directive Principles of State Policy—Amendment of the Constitution—Conclusion

1. Judicial Review

6.1. THE EXPRESSION "Judicial Review" has, in its application to federal constitutions, acquired a technical meaning. It signifies the power of the Court to pronounce on the constitutionality of a law. No such question can arise in jurisdictions in which, as in Great Britain, Parliament is supreme. It is only when the Legislature is subordinate to the Constitution and derives its powers from it, that the question whether a law enacted by it is intra vires of its powers can arise, and it is the adjudication of this question that has come to be called Judicial Review. As already pointed out, this is one of the fundamental sine qua non of federation. In the American Constitution, there is no express grant of such a power to the judiciary. But in the well-known case of Marbary v Maddison[	1 Crunch 137, 2 L. Ed. 60.], Marshall, C. J. held that such a power was, in a federal constitution, inherent in the judiciary, and that has ever since been accepted as the law. The Indian Constitution has, as already stated, expressly provided for it. Referring to this, Patanjali Sastri, C. J. observed in the State of Madras v. V. G. Row[	1952 SCR 597: AIR 1952 SC 196.]:

"Before proceeding to consider this question (of reasonableness of restrictions), we think it right to point out, what is sometimes overlooked, that our Constitution contains express provision for judicial review of legislation as to its conformity with the Constitution, unlike in America where the Supreme Court has assumed extensive powers of reviewing legislative acts under cover of the widely interpreted "due process" clause in the fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. If, then, the Courts in this country face up to such important and none too easy task, it is not out of any desire to tilt at legislative authority in a crusader's spirit, but in discharge of a duty plainly laid upon them by the Constitution. This is specially true as regards the "Fundamental Rights", as to which this Court has been assigned the role of a sentinel on the 'qui vive'. While the Court naturally attaches great weight to the legislative judgment, it cannot desert its own duty to determine finally the constitutionality of an impugned statute".

6.2. Thus while the power of Judicial Review exists both in America and in India, in the former it rests on an  interpretation of the Constitution by the judiciary, in the latter it is enacted in the Constitution itself.

2. Directive Principles of State Policy

6.3. One of the distinctive features of the Indian Constitution is the enunciation in PartIV of what are called Directive Principles of State Policy. In the Interim Report which was submitted to the Constituent Assembly, a distinction was made between Fundamental Rights which would be justiciable and Fundamental Rights which would not be. During the Debates in the Constituent Assembly, there was a move to abolish this distinction and make them all justiciable. But this did not succeed and it was decided to maintain the distinction between the two categories of provisions. The non-justiciable Fundamental Rights were called the Directive Principles of State Policy and embodied separately in PartIV. This scheme is not entirely novel. Explaining it in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Ambedkar said:

"The Directive Principles are like the Instruments of Instructions which were issued to the Governor-General and the Governors of Colonies, and to those of India, by the British Government under the 1935 Government of India Act. What it called 'Directive Principles' is merely another name for the Instruments of Instructions. The only difference is that they are instructions to the legislature and the executive. Whoever captures powers will not be free to do what he likes with it. In the exercise of it he will have to respect these Instruments of Instructions which are called Directive Principles."[	Constituent Assembly Debates Vol. II p. 41.]

But it is the Constitution of Eire, 1937 that must be said to be the direct model for enactment of PartIV.

6.4. The criticism has been advanced that whatever the ethical or political value of the Directive Principles, they have no place in a Constitution. The answer to this is to be found in what Dr. Arnbedkar stated in the Constituent Assembly :

"In enacting this Part of the Constitution, the Assembly is giving certain directions to the future legislature and the future executive to show in what manner they are to exercise the legislative and the executive power they will have. Surely, it is not the intention to introduce in this Part these principles as mere pious declarations. It is the intention of the Assembly that in future both the legislature and the executive should not merely pay lip-service to these principles but that they should be made the basis of all legislative and executive actions that they may be taking hereafter in the matter of the governance of the country."[	Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 7 p. 476.]

6.5. Thus while on the one hand Directive Principles are not justiciable, they are, on the other hand, to be followed by the Legislature in enacting laws. It is this that is enacted in Article 37 which is as follows:

"Article37. The provisions contained in this part shall not be enforceable by any Court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws."

With this may be compared Article 45 of the Constitution 'of Eire, 1937, which runs as follows :

"The principles of social policy set forth in this article are intended for the general governance of the Oireachtas. The application of these principles in the making of laws shall be the care of the Oireachtas exclusively, and shall not be cognizable by any court under any of the provisions of the Constitution."

6.6. Turning to the legal principles governing the application of the Directive Principles, firstly, if there is a conflict between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles, the former must prevail. In the State of Madras v. Champakam Dorairajan[	1951 SCR 525, AIR 1951 SC 226, 1951 S.C.J. 313.] the question was as to the validity of a Government regulation providing for admission to educational institutions maintained by the State, on a communal basis. This was sought to be supported on the basis of the Directive principle embodied in Article 46 that the State shall promote with special care the educational interests of the weaker sections of the public. Striking it down on the ground that the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 29 could not be abridged on the basis of Article 46, the Supreme Court observed:

"The Directive Principles of State policy, which by Article 37 are expressly made unenforceable by a Court cannot overrule the provisions found in PartIII which, notwithstanding other provisions, are expressly made enforceable by appropriate writs, orders or directions under Article 32. The chapter of Fundamental Rights is sacrosanct and not liable to be abridged by any Legislative or Executive Act or order, except to the extent provided in the appropriate Article in PartIII. The Directive Principles of State Policy have to conform to and run as subsidiary to the Chapter of Fundamental Rights. In our opinion, that is the correct way in which the provisions found in Parts III and IV have to be understood. However, so long as there is no infringement of any Fundamental Right, to the extent conferred by the provisions in PartIII, there can be no objection to the State acting in accordance with the Directive Principles set out in PartIV, but subject again to Legislative and Executive Powers and limitations conferred on the State under different provisions of the Constitution."

6.7. Secondly, when the Directive Principles do not conflict with any Articles in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights, they can be used as Explanations or supplements to them and sustained. Thus in Bijay Cotton Mills Ltd. v State of Ajmer[	1955 SCR 752, AIR 1955 SC 33, 1955 SCJ 51.], provisions in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 fixing a scale of minimum wages for labourers were attacked as interfering with the freedom of trade or business guaranteed by Article 19(1)  In rejecting this contention,' the Supreme Court referred to the Directive Principles embodied in Article 43 and held that in view of that provision the impugned sections of the Act must be held to be reasonable restrictions within Article 19(6). In M. H. Quareshi v. State of Bihar,[	1959 SCR 629, AIR 1958 SC 731, 1958 SCJ 975.] the question was as to the validity of certain laws prohibiting inter alia, the slaughter of cows. Their wire: was questioned on the ground that they invaded the right of the petitioners, who were butchers, to carry on their trade, under Article 19(1)  The Court referred to the Directive Principles embodied in Article 48 which prohibit " the slaughter of cows and calves" and " other milch and drought cattle ", and held that in view of this provision, the restriction must be held to be reasonable.

6.8. In the State of Bombay v. Balsara,[	1951 SCR 682, AIR 1951 SC 318, 1951 SCJ 478.] the definition of 'liquor' in the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 was attacked as too wide and beyond the competence of the Legislature under entry 31 of List II. In rejecting this contention, the Supreme Court referred to the Directive principles embodied in Article 47, and held that the law should be regarded as one on "health" within that Article and sustained. Thus, the Directive Principle in the Article was used in this decision even for interpretation of the legislative power under List II.

6.9. Before leaving this topic, we may refer to the following observations of an English Jurist on the purpose which Directive Principles in the Indian Constitution serve :

"If the Indian Constitution becomes vested with the cope of sanctity essential to its durability it will be difficult for any public figure to propose any important legislative measures without making any appeal to the Fundamental Rights or the Directive Principles. Measures will be attacked by the opposition as ' unconstitutional in so far as they conflict with the Directive Principles.[	A. Gladhill, The Republic of India, p. 162]

3. Amendment of the Constitution

6.10. This is a topic which is of paramount importance in the working of a federal Constitution. In a unitary state like Great Britain, the Legislature is supreme and the question of amendment of a law presents no problems and calls for no special provisions. The power to enact a law includes the power to repeal or amend it. But the position is wholly different in a federation. It is the Constitution that is supreme and all the three organs of the State including the Legislature derive their authority from it and are subordinate to it. The power of the Legislature in a federal Constitution extends only to the enactment of laws in the fields allotted to it and that includes the power to amend and repeal those laws but not the very Constitution under which it derives its authority.

Logically, the only authority that can amend it is a body which is invested with the status of a Constituent Assembly. That is why there are in every federal Constitution special provisions relating to their amendment. Thus Article V of the American Constitution enacts:

"The Congress whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the application of the Legislatures of two-thirds of the several States shall call a Convention for proposing Amendments, which, in either case shall be valid to all Intents and Purposes, as Part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, or by Conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the other Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress."

6.11. In Australia, Section 128 of the Constitution Act enacts that "the Constitution shall not be altered except in the following manner, and then provides that the proposed amendment should, after it is passed by a majority in the Legislature, be approved by a majority of the electors, in a majority of States.

6.12. Turning to the Constitution of India, Article 368 which substantially follows Article V of the American Constitution is as follows :

" An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President for his assent and upon such assent being given to the Bill, the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill: Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in:

(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, article 162 or article 241, or

(b) ChapterIV of PartV, ChapterV of PartVI or ChapterI of PartXI, or

(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or

(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or

(e) the provisions of this article, the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States. . .by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented to the President for assent.

6.13. It will be seen that Article 368 deals with two classes of amendments (I) amendment of the Constitution in general, and (2) amendment the proviso.

(1) An amendment of the of the provisions specified in constitution in general has to satisfy the conditions laid down in the body of the article. It must be initiated in either House of Parliament. It must be passed by a majority of the total membership of the House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of that house present and voting and it has to receive the assent of the President.

(2) When the amendment relates to any of the provisions specified in the proviso, it has in addition to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one half of the States. What has to be noted with reference to this class of amendment is that among the matters specified in the Proviso are those which are essential for the preservation of the Federal Character of the Constitution. Such for example are ChapterI of PartXI regulating the relations between the Union and the States in the distribution of legislative powers and the lists in the Seventh Schedule which allocate the topics on which the legislatures of the Union and the States can legislate.

6.14. We may now pass on to consider a question which has recently sprung into lime-light, whether the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under PartIII of the Constitution could be amended under Article 368. In Shankari Prasad v. Union of India[	1952 S.C.R. 89.], the Supreme Court had answered it in the affirmative. The correctness of this decision came up for consideration in Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan.[	1965 (1) S.C.R. 933.] The Chief Justice delivering the judgement of the majority of the Court examined the question in great detail and expressed his agreement with the conclusions reached in Shankari Prasad's case. The other two Judges were critical of that decision but did not express any final opinion on it. But quite recently the question was re agitated in Golaknath v. State of Punjab,[	Writ Petition No. 153 of 1966, not reported.] and it was held therein by a majority of six to five, dissenting from the decision in Shankari Prasad's case, that Article 13 (2) prohibited the enactment of any law abridging or taking away Fundamental Rights, that an amendment of the Constitution under Article 368 was a law within that Article and that. accordingly the first and the seventeenth Amendments of the Indian Constitution which abridged the fundamental rights under article 31 were unconstitutional. In view of the fact that the question involved is of far reaching importance and that judicial opinion on it is sharply divided, it cannot be taken that the point is concluded by the decision in Golak Nath's case. It becomes, therefore, necessary to discuss what the correct position is on the provisions of the Constitution.

6.15. The reasoning on which the decision of the majority in Golak Nath's case rests may be summarised thus : Article 368 merely prescribes the procedure to be followed in making amendments. It does not confer a power to make amendment. That is done by Article 248 and entry 97. Article 13(2) enacts that "the State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall to the extent of the contravention be void ". A law amending the constitution is one falling within the purview of this provision and therefore there is no power in the legislature to enact a law taking away or abridging Fundamental Rights. It is said as against this that article 368 is more than a procedural enactment. that it confers a Positive Power to amend the Constitution, that an amendment made under this Article is not law within Article 13(2) and is therefore not subject to the prohibition imposed therein, and that it will be valid if it complied with the requirement of Articles 368. It will be seen that the controversy really turns on the true scope of Article 368 under 13(2).

6.16. We may first take up article 368 for consideration. Is it only procedural or does it also confer a substantive power? It occurs in PartXX headed "Amendment of the Constitution" and it is the only provision contained therein. On that, one would prima facie think that it must be exhaustive of the law on the subject. Then the opening words are "an amendment of the constitution may be initiated". The amendment contemplated by this must mean the whole of the Constitution without any qualification or reservation. The concluding words before the proviso are "the Constitution shall stand amended". In other words, the amendment itself becomes the Constitution. The provision that the Bill should be passed by a requisite majority is clearly a substantive provision, and not a mere matter of procedure. And further the Article is, as already stated, in two parts, one relating to amendment of the Constitution in general, and the other to the amendment of specific provisions, mentioned in the proviso, some of which relate to matters concerning the States. The condition as to ratification by a majority of States cannot be treated as one of procedure. A reading of the Article as a whole clearly warrants the conclusion that it is intended to embody both the substantive and procedural aspects of amendment of the Constitution. It will be noted that Article V of the American Constitution on which Article 368 is based is substantially in the same terms and it was under this provision that amendments to the Constitution have been made in America.

6.17. In support of the view that Article 368 is only procedural in its content, reliance is placed on the marginal note to the Article which is, " the procedure for amendment of the Constitution ". This is not wholly incorrect because procedure is also dealt with in the Article, but it will be erroneous to read it as meaning that the Article deals only with procedure, and does not include the substantive power to amend. Moreover, it is well settled that marginal notes are not admissible to control the import of a statutory provision. On the other hand, the heading of a Chapter has been held to be material in ascertaining the scope of the provisions enacted therein and ChapterXX is headed "Amendment of the Constitution". This is comprehensive and includes both the substantive and procedural aspects of it. And there is the outstanding fact that if the intention was to exclude Fundamental Rights from the operation of Article 368, nothing was easier than to enact a simple provision therein that it has no application to PartIII of the Constitution, instead of leaving the result to be gathered from a construction of other Articles in the constitution.

6.18. Turning next to Article 13(2), it enacts a prohibition against the State making any law which takes away or abridges the Fundamental Rights in PartIII. It is material to note that the prohibition is against the State and Article 12 defines State as including "the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India". It is necessary for our purpose only to note that Parliament of India is included in the definition of State. PartV of the Constitution contains the provisions relating to the Constitution and powers of the three organs of the Union Government and ChapterII therein deals with the Legislature. Article 79 provides that "there shall be a Parliament for the Union which shall consist of a President and two Houses to be known respectively as a Council of State and the House of People." Thus Parliament is the Union Legislature established by the Constitution. Therefore, "law" in Article 13 (2) must mean a law of Parliament functioning under ChapterII of PartV. It cannot mean the Constitution itself because as already stated more than once that is the Supreme authority and the three organs of the State derive their powers from it. It is true that the word "law" will, in its broad sense, include both the Constitution and laws enacted by a legislature constituted under the Constitution. But as observed in Shankari Prasad's case, "there is a clear demarcation between ordinary law which is made in exercise of legislative power, and Constitutional law which is made in exercise of constituent power". Therefore, a power to amend the Constitution is different from a power to amend an ordinary law. The legislatures constituted under the Constitution have the power to enact laws on the topics enumerated in Lists I to III and the power to enact laws carries with it the power to amend or repeal them. But they have no power to amend the Constitution because it is Constituent Assembly that has enacted it and it is only a body having the status of a Constituent Assembly that can amend it. That is the status given to the authority constituted under Article 368 and that alone has the power to amend the Constitution and not the Union Legislature. The distinction between the power to amend a constitution and the ordinary power to enact law is one fundamental to all federal Constitutions. Writing on this aspect, Mr. Orfield says in the "Amending of the Federal Constitution"

"When the Congress is engaged in the amending process it is not legislating. It is exercising a peculiar power bestowed upon it by Article V. This Article for the most part controls the process; and other provisions of the Constitution such as those relating to the passage of legislation having but little bearing."

6.19. Thus an amendment of the Constitution made under Article 368 is what may be called Constituent law and not law as defined under Article 13.

6.20. Does it make any difference that under Article 368 the Bill has to be introduced in either House of Parliament? Does that alter the status of Parliament as Constituent Assembly under Article 368 and assimilate it to that of the Union Legislature? The answer is to be found in the history of the Constituent Assembly which enacted the Constitution. It will be remembered that the Constituent Assembly which was summoned on 9th December 1946 to frame a Constitution was also invested after Independence with legislative power; and that it framed the Constitution as Constituent Assembly and enacted ordinary laws as Legislature. What is material, therefore, is not Whether the authority constituted under Article 368 is Parliament or a different body. What really matters is whether it really functions as Constituent Assembly or as Legislature. Under Article V of the American Constitution the authority before which the proposal for amendment is to be made is either House and it has been held that the Houses function under that Article not as Legislature but as Constituent Assembly. In the Australian Constitution, the Bill for amendment has to be passed by the Commonwealth Parliament and then it has to be submitted to the verdict of electorates. This is clearly not the ordinary legislative process of Parliament. That is also the position when the amendment falls Within the proviso to Article 368, which requires that the amendment must be ratified by a majority of State Legislatures. The Union Legislature acting under PartV ChapterII has no manner of connection with the State Legislature and clearly therefore Parliament acting under Article 368 does not act as Union Legislature. Nor is it material that in the passage of the Bill, the Houses adopt the procedure prescribed for ordinary legislation in ChapterII of PartV. As observed by Mr. Orfield in the extract already given, the provisions relating to the passage of legislation have little bearing on this. If the intention of the Constitution was to leave it to the Union Legislature as such to enact amendments of the Constitution it would have been sufficient to insert a provision in ChapterII of PartV that a Bill amending the Constitution should be passed by two-thirds majority before it is assented to by the President, without enacting a separate Part therefor and inserting a provision therein for the purpose.

6.21.There is one other consideration which is material for determining this question. Under clause (e) in the proviso to Article 368 that Article itself is included among the provisions which could be amended as therein prescribed. Therefore, an amendment of Article 368 providing that provisions under PartIII could be amended as provided in the body of the Article would be intra vires; and if such an amendment were made the Fundamental Rights could be abridged or taken away. If it was intended by Article I 3 (2) to exclude PartIII altogether from the operation of Article 368, clause (e) would not have been enacted. It would therefore be right to conclude that it was not the intention of the Constitution to take Fundamental Rights out of Article 368. In the view that the power to amend the Constitution does not fall within the ambit of the powers of the Union Legislature, it is unnecessary to consider whether such a power could be spelt out of Article 248 and entry 97 in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. They deal with the power of Union Legislature to enact laws and the power to amend the Constitution must fall outside it.

6.22. So far the question has been discussed with reference to the provisions of the Constitution which directly bear on it. But there are certain other considerations which have had an impact on the decision on this question. The Fundamental Rights indisputably occupy a transcendent position in the Constitution. They are necessary for the Government of a country which is divided by language and religion. They are also necessary for enabling human beings to evolve themselves to their full stature. But then the ultimate solution for this is in the education of the people in the concepts of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity and not in putting on the nation the fetters of a Constitutional inhibition for all times to come. It has been observed by a well-known writer on the American Constitution that an unamendable Constitution is a contradiction in terms and it is 'a Government by the Grave-yards."[	Munro "Government of the United States".] But at the same time it is true that over flexibility in the power to amend the Constitution might defeat the very purpose underlying the enactment of Fundamental Rights and might place them at the mercy of political majorities and subject them to their despotism. It is, therefore, necessary that while there should be power to amend the Constitution, it should not be too rigid or too flexible and that is what Article 368 attempts to achieve.

6.23. The ease with which the party in power had in the past effected amendments of the Constitution with its steamroller majority has been responsible for the strong criticism that Fundamental Rights should be placed beyond the reach of any process of amendment. While one can understand this attitude, to prohibit the power to amend altogether because it has been exercised over lightly in the past would not be the correct solution to the problem. It is no ground for refusing a power that it is liable to be abused. It may be that Article 368 might require to be amended so as to require that every amendment of the Constitution should in order to become law be affirmed by a subsequent Parliament elected on the issue of amendment. There is precedent for it in other Constitutions. The experience of Australia in the enactment of Social Welfare Legislation in 1942-44 and in 1946 to which reference has already been made shows that conditions as to referendum might operate as insuperable bar in making amendments. Whether the provisions under Article 368 require to be amended as regards the process of amendment, and if so, how, are matters beyond the scope of this lecture. It is sufficient to say that on its interpretation Article 368 authorises the amendment of the whole Constitution including Fundamental Rights in PartIII.

Ed/Note: The views expressed in preceding paragraphs are, however repeatedly rejected by Supreme Court of India, in its subsequent decision and the decision in Golak Nath pronouncing unalterable nature of basic structure of the constitution is the law of the land now.

Conclusion

To SUM UP:

6.24. Our Constitution is the work of master minds who have built on the Federal and democratic foundations laid under the Government of India Act, 1935, a massive structure, well-planned and well-built. It has adopted federation as the form of Government best suited to a country which is divided by language and religion but is at the same time well knit together by cultural and geographical ties. The Indian Constitution can be said to be an expression in the sphere of politics of the concept of unity in diversity evolved in the Vedanta system of Indian philosophy. While drawing from the federal Constitutions of other countries it has also introduced certain unitary features which experience has shown to be necessary for the life of a nation. In America and Australia, it is well known that special powers were asked for and granted during the emergency created by the war and it is pointed out by Mr. Wheare that this has not affected the character of their constitutions as federal. These have been embodied in our Constitution as Emergency powers. A federation consists not merely in the letter of the law enacted in the Constitution but even more in its actual working. In the past when there was practically a mono party Government in the Centre and in the States, there has not been much of an opportunity to develop healthy conventions in the Union-State relations. In the changed conditions of the present day they have become essential and necessary for the harmonious working of the Federation. Then there are the Fundamental Rights intended to secure for every citizen those freedoms which are the bedrock of a democratic government. Federation and Fundamental Rights are the two eyes of the Constitution. It is the duty of all of us to hold them sacred and do nothing which will impair them. The Federation should be worked so as to maintain a balance between the power of the Central Government to protect the national interests and safeguard them against attacks not only from without but from within, and the power of the State Governments to manage fully and freely the subjects entrusted to them by the Constitution. Likewise, while it is the duty of the State not to infringe Fundamental Rights of the citizens, the latter have the duty to exercise those rights consistently with the rights of others and in the true spirit of the Constitution. In other words there must be a balance between the power of the State to enact social welfare legislation and the right of the individuals to preserve and maintain their freedoms with respect to person, property, religion and culture. There must be power in the Government to amend the Constitution including the chapter on Fundamental Rights. But that does not mean that the Fundamental Rights should be altered or abridged at the will of the ruling party which commands the requisite majority. It is right that the Government should have the powers of a giant but it is not right that it should exercise them, save in exceptional circumstances and in the interest of the general public.

.~.~.~.

About the author:

Late Justice T.L.Venkatarama Aiyar (1893-1971) hails from Harikesanallur, Tirunelveli District, Tamilnadu, India. He was a person who attained eminence in three fields, namely, Law, Carnatic Music and Sanskrit.

Having a very rich Carnatic music lineage (related to Harikesanallur Muthiah Bhagvathar), he was a member of the Experts Committee of Music Academy and was an authority on the compositions of Dikshitar. He also authored the biography of Dikshitar entitled 'The Life of Muthuswami Dikshitar'. He had trained several eminent musicians like Vidya Sankar, D K Pattammal, B Rajam Iyer, Kalpagam Swaminathan, S Srinivasa Rao and Kannama Sharma. In 1944, he received the "Sangeetha kalanidhi" award, which is the highest award, awarded in the field of Carnatic Music.

Like his father,Shri Mahamabopadyaya M. Lakshmanasuri, he too has authored many great Sanskrit books, which till date are considered to have exceptional literal value. A number of educational institutions till date are referring and following his books.

Born on 25th November,1893, he graduated from Madras Christian law College in 1916. Thereafter, he proceeded to do his apprenticeship from Sir Alladi Krishna Swamy Ayyar. He started practicing in the High court of Madras from 1917 onwards. He became the Judge of the High court of Madras on 7th November 1951 and served till 24th November 1953. After serving as a lawyer and judge in the High court of  Madras till 1953, Justice TL Venkatarama Aiyar became the Justice of Supreme Court of India 4th January 1954.He held office till 24th November 1958.

In his tenure as Justice of Supreme Court, apart from rendering several important judgements, he was also part of the  constitutional bench and rendered various landmark judgements. Subsequently he was the Chairman of the  Law  Commission till 1961.

About Revising Author:

Sandeep Bhalla is a practicing lawyer domiciled in New Delhi, India. For past over two decades, he has written many books but all for the benefit of legal community. This book is a part of Opusculum series aimed at students and common people interested in understanding  the relevant law while also going into a mild debate that is required from a Legal Commentary.

Relating to author:

The author maintains his person blog at sandeepbhalla.com.

His photo blog is 'my2dworldofpictures'

His legal scrapbook is called 'Opusculum of law and Justice'

Other Works of author:

Click on the link to relate to other works of Sandeep Bhalla.

Abridged from longer version.
