# Section 20

Cora Prodmore was quite out of tune. She had been standing beyond and rather behind Captain Yule; but she now moved quickly round and reached her new friend’s right. “Mrs. Gracedew, may _I_ speak to you?” Her father, before the reply could come, had taken up the place. “_After_ Captain Yule, my dear.” He was in a state of positively polished lucidity. “You must make the most--don’t you see?--of the opportunity of the others!” He waved her to the staircase as one who knew what he was about, but, while the young man, turning his back, moved consciously and nervously away, the girl renewed her effort to provoke Mrs. Gracedew to detain her. It happened, to her sorrow, that this lady appeared for the moment, to the detriment of any free attention, to be absorbed in Captain Yule’s manner; so that Cora could scarce disengage her without some air of invidious reference to it. Recognising as much, she could only for two seconds, but with great yearning, parry her own antagonist. “She’ll _help_ me, I think, papa!” “That’s exactly what strikes me, love!” he cheerfully replied. “But _I’ll_ help you too!” He gave her, toward the stairs, a push proportioned both to his authority and to her weight; and while she reluctantly climbed in the wake of the visitors, he laid on Mrs. Gracedew’s arm, with a portentous glance at Captain Yule, a hand of commanding significance. “Just pile it on!” Her attention came back--she seemed to see. “He doesn’t like it?” “Not half enough. Bring him round.” Her eyes rested again on their companion, who had fidgeted further away and who now, with his hands in his pockets and unaware of this private passage, stood again in the open doorway and gazed into the grey court. Something in the sight determined her. “I’ll bring him round.” But at this moment Cora, pausing half-way up, sent down another entreaty. “Mrs. Gracedew, will you see _me_?” The charming woman looked at her watch. “In ten minutes,” she smiled back. Mr. Prodmore, bland and assured, looked at his own. “You could put him through in five--but I’ll allow you twenty. There!” he decisively cried to his daughter, whom he quickly rejoined and hustled on her course. Mrs. Gracedew kissed after her a hand of vague comfort. IV The silence that reigned between the pair might have been registered as embarrassing had it lasted a trifle longer. Yule had continued to turn his back, but he faced about, though he was distinctly grave, in time to avert an awkwardness. “How do you come to know so much about my house?” She was as distinctly not grave. “How do _you_ come to know so little?” “It’s not my fault,” he said very gently. “A particular combination of misfortunes has forbidden me, till this hour, to come within a mile of it.” These words evidently struck her as so exactly the right ones to proceed from the lawful heir that such a felicity of misery could only quicken her interest. He was plainly as good in his way as the old butler--the particular combination of misfortunes corresponded to the lifelong service. Her interest, none the less, in its turn, could only quicken her pity, and all her emotions, we have already seen, found prompt enough expression. What could any expression do indeed now but mark the romantic reality? “Why, you poor thing!”--she came toward him on the weary road. “Now that you’ve got here I hope at least you’ll stay.” Their intercourse must pitch itself--so far as she was concerned--in some key that would make up for things. “Do make yourself comfortable. Don’t mind me.” Yule looked a shade less serious. “That’s exactly what I wanted to say to _you_!” She was struck with the way it came in. “Well, if you _had_ been haughty, I shouldn’t have been quite crushed, should I?” The young man’s gravity, at this, completely yielded. “I’m never haughty--oh, no!” She seemed even more amused. “Fortunately then, as _I’m_ never crushed. I don’t think,” she added, “that I’m really as crushable as you.” The smile with which he received this failed to conceal completely that it was something of a home thrust. “Aren’t we really _all_ crushable--by the right thing?” She considered a little. “Don’t you mean rather by the wrong?” He had got, clearly, a trifle more accustomed to her being extraordinary. “Are you sure we always know them apart?” She weighed the responsibility. “I always do. Don’t you?” “Not quite every time!” “Oh,” she replied, “I don’t think, thank goodness, we have positively ‘every time’ to distinguish.” “Yet we must always act,” he objected. She turned this over; then with her wonderful living look, “I’m glad to hear it,” she exclaimed, “because, I fear, I always _do_! You’ll certainly think,” she added with more gravity, “that I’ve taken a line today!” “Do you mean that of mistress of the house? Yes--you do seem in possession!” “_You_ don’t!” she honestly answered; after which, as to attenuate a little the rigour of the charge: “You don’t comfortably look it, I mean. You don’t look”--she was very serious--“as I want you to.” It was when she was most serious that she was funniest. “How do you ‘want’ me to look?” She endeavoured, while he watched her, to make up her mind, but seemed only, after an instant, to recognise a difficulty. “When you look at _me_, you’re all right!” she sighed. It was an obstacle to her lesson, and she cast her eyes about. “Look at that chimneypiece.” “Well----?” he inquired as his eyes came back from it. “You mean to say it isn’t lovely?” He returned to it without passion--gave a vivid sign of mere disability. “I’m sure I don’t know. I don’t mean to say anything. I’m a rank outsider.” It had an instant effect on her--she almost pounced upon him. “Then you must let me put you up!” “Up to what?” “Up to everything!”--his levity added to her earnestness. “You were smoking when you came in,” she said as she glanced about. “Where’s your cigarette?” The young man appreciatively produced another. “I thought perhaps I mightn’t--here.” “You may everywhere.” He bent his head to the information. “Everywhere.” She laughed at his docility, yet could only wish to presume upon it. “It’s a rule of the house!” He took in the place with greater pleasure. “What delightful rules!” “How could such a house have any others?”--she was already launched again in her brave relation to it. “I _may_ go up just once more--mayn’t I--to the long gallery?” How could he tell? “The long gallery?” With an added glow she remembered. “I forgot you’ve never seen it. Why, it’s the leading thing about you!” She was full, on the spot, of the pride of showing it. “Come right up!” Clement Yule, half seated on a table from which his long left leg nervously swung, only looked at her and smiled and smoked. “There’s a party up.” She remembered afresh. “So _we_ must be the party down? Well, you must give me a chance. That long gallery’s the principal thing I came over for.” She was strangest of all when she explained. “Where in heaven’s name did you come over from?” “Missoura Top, where I’m building--just in this style. I came for plans and ideas,” Mrs. Gracedew serenely pursued. “I felt I must look right _at_ you.” “But what did you know about us?” She kept it a moment as if it were too good to give him all at once. “Everything!” He seemed indeed almost afraid to touch it. “At ‘Missoura Top’?” “Why not? It’s a growing place--forty thousand the last census.” She hesitated; then as if her warrant should be slightly more personal: “My husband left it to me.” The young man presently changed his posture. “You’re a widow?” Nothing was wanting to the simplicity of her quiet assent. “A very lone woman.” Her face, for a moment, had the vision of a long distance. “My loneliness is great enough to want something big to hold it--and my taste good enough to want something beautiful. You see, I had your picture.” Yule’s innocence made a movement. “Mine?” Her smile reassured him; she nodded toward the main entrance. “A water colour I chanced on in Boston.” “In Boston?” She stared. “Haven’t you heard of Boston either?” “Yes--but what has Boston heard of _me_?” “It wasn’t ‘you,’ unfortunately--it was your divine south front. The drawing struck me so that I got you up--in the books.” He appeared, however, rather comically, but half to make it out, or to gather at any rate that there was even more of it than he feared. “Are we in the books?” “Did you never discover it?” Before his blankness, the dim apprehension in his fine amused and troubled face of how much there was of it, her frank, gay concern for him sprang again to the front. “Where in heaven’s name, Captain Yule, have _you_ come over from?” He looked at her very kindly, but as if scarce expecting her to follow. “The East End of London.” She had followed perfectly, he saw the next instant, but she had by no means equally accepted. “What were you doing there?” He could only put it, though a little over-consciously, very simply. “Working, you see. When I left the army--it was much too slow, unless one was personally a whirlwind of war--I began to make out that, for a fighting man----” “There’s always,” she took him up, “somebody or other to go for?” He considered her, while he smoked, with more confidence; as if she might after all understand. “The enemy, yes--everywhere in force. I went for _him_: misery and ignorance and vice--injustice and privilege and wrong. Such as you see me----” “You’re a rabid reformer?”--she understood beautifully. “I wish we had you at Missoura Top!” He literally, for a moment, in the light of her beauty and familiarity, appeared to measure his possible use there; then, looking round him again, announced with a sigh that, predicament for predicament, his own would do. “I fear my work is nearer home. I hope,” he continued, “since you’re so good as to seem to care, to perform a part of that work in the next House of Commons. My electors have wanted me----” “And you’ve wanted _them_,” she lucidly put in, “and that has been why you couldn’t come down.” “Yes, for all this last time. And before that, from my childhood up, there was another reason.” He took a few steps away and brought it out as rather a shabby one. “A family feud.” She proved to be quite delighted with it. “Oh, I’m so glad--I _hoped_ I’d strike a ‘feud’! That rounds it off, and spices it up, and, for the heartbreak with which I take leave of you, just neatly completes the fracture!” Her reference to her going seemed suddenly, on this, to bring her back to a sense of proportion and propriety, and she glanced about once more for some wrap or reticule. This, in turn, however, was another recall. “Must I really wait--to go up?” He had watched her movement, had changed colour, had shifted his place, had tossed away, plainly unwitting, a cigarette but half smoked; and now he stood in her path to the staircase as if, still unsatisfied, he abruptly sought a way to turn the tables. “Only till you tell me this: if you absolutely meant, awhile ago, that this old thing is so precious.” She met his doubt with amazement and his density with compassion. “Do you literally need I should _say_ it? Can you stand here and not feel it?” If he had the misfortune of bandaged eyes, she could at least rejoice in her own vision, which grew intenser with her having to speak for it. She spoke as with a new rush of her impression. “It’s a place to love----” Yet to say the whole thing was not easy. “To love----?” he impatiently insisted. “Well, as you’d love a person!” If that was saying the whole thing, saying the whole thing could only be to go. A sound from the “party up” came down at that moment, and she took it so clearly as a call that, for a sign of separation, she passed straight to the stairs. “Good-bye!” The young man let her reach the foot, but then, though the greatest width of the hall now divided them, spoke, anxiously and nervously, as if the point she had just made brought them still more together. “I think I ‘feel’ it, you know; but it’s simply you--your presence, as I may say, and the remarkable way you put it--that make me. I’m afraid that in your absence----” He struck a match to smoke again. It gave her time apparently to make out something to pause for. “In my absence?” He lit his cigarette. “I may come back----” “Come back?” she took him almost sharply up. “I should like to see you _not_!” He smoked a moment. “I mean to my old idea----” She had quite turned round on him now. “Your old idea----?” He faced her over the width still between them. “Well--that one _could_ give it up.” Her stare, at this, fairly filled the space. “Give up Covering? How in the world--or why?” “Because I can’t afford to keep it.” It brought her straight back, but only half-way: she pulled up short as at a flash. “Can’t you let it?” Again he smoked before answering. “Let it to _you_?” She gave a laugh, and her laugh brought her nearer. “I’d take it in a minute!” Clement Yule remained grave. “I shouldn’t have the face to charge you a rent that would make it worth one’s while, and I think even you, dear lady”--his voice just trembled as he risked that address--“wouldn’t have the face to offer me one.” He paused, but something in his aspect and manner checked in her now any impulse to read his meaning too soon. “My lovely inheritance is Dead Sea fruit. It’s mortgaged for all it’s worth and I haven’t the means to pay the interest. If by a miracle I could scrape the money together, it would leave me without a penny to live on.” He puffed his cigarette profusely. “So if I find the old home at last--I lose it by the same luck!” Mrs. Gracedew had hung upon his words, and she seemed still to wait, in visible horror, for something that would improve on them. But when she had to take them for his last, “I never heard of anything so awful!” she broke out. “Do you mean to say you can’t arrange----?” “Oh, yes,” he promptly replied, “an arrangement--if that be the name to give it--has been definitely proposed to me.” “What’s the matter, then?”--she had dropped into relief. “For heaven’s sake, you poor thing, definitely accept it!” He laughed, though with little joy, at her sweet simplifications. “I’ve made up my mind in the last quarter of an hour that I can’t. It’s such a peculiar case.” Mrs. Gracedew frankly wondered; her bias was clearly sceptical. “_How_ peculiar----?” He found the measure difficult to give. “Well--more peculiar than most cases.” Still she was not satisfied. “More peculiar than mine?” “Than yours?”--Clement Yule knew nothing about that. Something, at this, in his tone, his face--it might have been his “British” density--seemed to pull her up. “I forgot--you don’t know mine. No matter. What _is_ yours?” He took a few steps in thought. “Well, the fact that I’m asked to change.” “To change what?” He wondered how he could put it; then at last, on his own side, simplified. “My attitude.” “Is that all?”--she was relieved again. “Well, you’re not a statue.” “No, I’m not a statue; but on the other hand, don’t you see? I’m not a windmill.” There was good-humour, none the less, in his rigour. “The mortgages I speak of have all found their way, like gregarious silly sheep, into the hands of one person--a devouring wolf, a very rich, a very sharp man of money. He holds me in this manner at his mercy. He consents to make things comfortable for me, but he requires that, in return, I shall do something for him that--don’t you know?--rather sticks in my crop.” It appeared on this light showing to stick for a moment even in Mrs. Gracedew’s. “Do you mean something wrong?” He had not a moment’s hesitation. “Exceedingly so!” She turned it over as if pricing a Greek Aldus. “Anything immoral?” “Yes--I may literally call it immoral.” She courted, however, frankly enough, the strict truth. “Too bad to tell?” He indulged in another pensive fidget, then left her to judge. “He wants me to give up----” Yet again he faltered. “To give up what?” What could it be, she appeared to ask, that was barely nameable? He quite blushed to her indeed as he came to the point. “My fundamental views.” She was disappointed--she had waited for more. “Nothing but _them_?” He met her with astonishment. “Surely they’re quite enough, when one has unfortunately”--he rather ruefully smiled--“so very many!” She laughed aloud; this was frankly so odd a plea. “Well, _I’ve_ a neat collection too, but I’d ‘swap,’ as they say in the West, the whole set----!” She looked about the hall for something of equivalent price; after which she pointed, as it caught her eye, to the great cave of the fireplace. “I’d take _that_ set!” The young man scarcely followed. “The fire-irons?” “For the whole fundamental lot!” She gazed with real yearning at the antique group. “_They’re_ three hundred years old. Do you mean to tell me your wretched ‘views’----?” “Have anything like that age? No, thank God,” Clement Yule laughed, “my views--wretched as you please!--are quite in their prime! They’re a hungry little family that has got to be fed. They keep me awake at night.” “Then you must