# Section 26

close the door fast behind you, is all I can figure out to do for you?” His emotion trembled out of him with the stammer of a new language, but it was as if in a minute or two he had thrown over all consciousness. “You’re the most generous--you’re the noblest of women! The wonderful chance that brought you here----!” His own arm was grasped now--she knew better than he about the wonderful chance. “It brought _you_ at the same happy hour! I’ve done what I liked,” she went on very simply; “and the only way to thank me is to believe it.” “You’ve done it for a proud, poor man”--his answer was quite as direct. “He has nothing--in the light of such a magic as yours--either to give or to hope; but you’ve made him, in a little miraculous hour, think of you----” He stumbled with the rush of things, and if silence can, in its way, be active, there was a collapse too, for an instant, on her closed lips. These lips, however, she at last opened. “How have I made him think of me?” “As he has thought of no other woman!” He had personal possession of her now, and it broke, as he pressed her, as he pleaded, the helpless fall of his eloquence. “Mrs. Gracedew--don’t leave me.” He jerked his head passionately at the whole place and the yellow afternoon. “If you made me care----” “It was surely that you had made _me_ first!” She laughed, and her laugh disengaged her, so that before he could reply she had again put space between them. He accepted the space now--he appeared so sure of his point. “Then let me go on caring. When I asked you awhile back for some possible adjustment to my new source of credit, you simply put off the question--told me I must trust to time for it. Well,” said Clement Yule, “I’ve trusted to time so effectually that ten little minutes have made me find it. I’ve found it because I’ve so quickly found _you_. May I, Mrs. Gracedew, keep _all_ that I’ve found? I offer you in return the only thing I have to give--I offer you my hand and my life.” She held him off, across the hall, for a time almost out of proportion to the previous wait he had just made so little of. Then at last also, when she answered, it might have passed for a plea for further postponement, even for a plea for mercy. “Ah, Captain Yule----!” But she turned suddenly off: the flower had been nipped in the bud by the re-entrance of Chivers, at whom his master veritably glowered. “What the devil is it?” The old man showed the shock, but he had his duty. “Another party.” Mrs. Gracedew, at this, wheeled round. “The ‘party up’!” It brought back her voice--indeed, all her gaiety. And her gaiety was always determinant. “Show them in.” Clement Yule’s face fell while Chivers proceeded to obey. “You’ll _have_ them?” he wailed across the hall. “Ah! mayn’t I be proud of my house?” she tossed back at him. At this, radiant, he had rushed at her. “Then you accept----?” Her raised hand checked him. “Hush!” He fell back--the party was there. Chivers ushered it as he had ushered the other, making the most, this time, of more scanty material--four persons so spectacled, satchelled, shawled, and handbooked that they testified on the spot to a particular foreign origin and presented themselves indeed very much as tourists who, at an hotel, casting up the promise of comfort or the portent of cost, take possession, while they wait for their keys, with expert looks and free sounds. Clement Yule, who had receded, effacing himself, to the quarter opposed to that of his companion, addressed to their visitors a covert but dismayed stare and then, edging round, in his agitation, to the rear, instinctively sought relief by escape through the open passage. One of the invaders meanwhile--a broad-faced gentleman with long hair tucked behind his ears and a ring on each forefinger--had lost no time in showing he knew where to begin. He began at the top--the proper place, and took in the dark pictures ranged above the tapestry. “Olt vamily bortraits?”--he appealed to Chivers and spoke very loud. Chivers rose to the occasion and, gracefully pawing the air, began also at the beginning. “Dame Dorothy Yule--who lived to a hundred and one.” “A hundred and one--ach _so_!” broke, with a resigned absence of criticism, from each of the interested group; another member of which, however, indicated with a somewhat fatigued skip the central figure of the series, the personage with the long white legs that Mrs. Gracedew had invited the previous inquirers to remark. “Who’s dis?” the present inquirer asked. The question affected the lovely lady over by the fireplace as the trumpet of battle affects a generous steed. She flashed on the instant into the middle of the hall and into the friendliest and most familiar relation with everyone and with everything. “John Anthony Yule, sir,--who passed away, poor duck, in his flower!” They met her with low salutations, a sweep of ugly shawls, and a brush of queer German hats: she had issued, to their glazed convergence, from the dusk of the Middle Ages and the shade of high pieces, and now stood there, beautiful and human and happy, in a light that, whatever it was for themselves, the very breadth of their attention, the expression of their serious faces, converted straightway for her into a new, and oh! into the right, one. To a detached observer of the whole it would have been promptly clear that she found herself striking these good people very much as the lawful heir had, half an hour before, struck another stranger--that she produced in them, in her setting of assured antiquity, quite the romantic vibration that she had responded to in the presence of that personage. They read her as she read _him_, and a bright and deepening cheer, reflected dimly in their thick thoroughness, went out from her as she accepted their reading. An impression was exchanged, for the minute, from side to side--their grave admiration of the finest feature of the curious house and the deep free radiance of her silent, grateful “Why not?” It made a passage of some intensity and some duration, of which the effect, indeed, the next minute, was to cause the only lady of the party--a matron of rich Jewish type, with small nippers on a huge nose and a face out of proportion to her little Freischütz hat--to break the spell by an uneasy turn and a stray glance at one of the other pictures. “Who’s _dat_?” “That?” The picture chanced to be a portrait over the wide arch, and something happened, at the very moment, to arrest Mrs. Gracedew’s eyes rather above than below. What took place, in a word, was that Clement Yule, already fidgeting in his impatience back from the front, just occupied the arch, completed her thought, and filled her vision. “Oh, that’s my future husband!” He caught the words, but answered them only by a long look at her as he moved, with a checked wildness of which she alone, of all the spectators, had a sense, straight across the hall again and to the other opening. He paused there as he had done before, then with a last dumb appeal to her dropped into the court and passed into the garden. Mrs. Gracedew, already so wonderful to their visitors, was, before she followed him, wonderful with a greater wonder to poor Chivers. “You dear old thing--I give it all back to you!” WORKS BY HENRY JAMES. EMBARRASSMENTS. 12mo, cloth, $1.50. “Mr. Henry James has produced no more clever and subtle work than is to be found in his latest volume.... There are in these tales passages of splendid realism. The portrait of Geoffrey Dowling is a masterpiece of characterization. And there are sentences, unobtrusive asides, which flash with the brilliancy of true wit.”--_New York Tribune._ “Mr. James’s writings are distinctively works of art. One and all of them appeal most strongly to cultivated minds. In no instance does he descend from his transcendent ideals of literature. An acquaintance with Henry James means an appreciation of the finer style of written English, and an inhalation of the atmosphere of purest English literature. No list of books for the summer will be complete without ‘=Embarrassments=.’”--_Cambridge Press._ THE OTHER HOUSE. 12mo, cloth, $1.50. “The characters are original and well drawn. The incidents are natural and clearly described. The dialogues are crisp and to the point. Neither of ‘padding’ nor a vulgar sensationalism is there any trace. A most meritorious work, then, and one which can hardly fail to add to the author’s reputation.”--_New York Herald._ “‘The Other House’ shows Henry James at his best. That best is a putting into words of an exquisite comprehension of motives and shades of thought, a magic grasp of character variations, a bringing to the surface of hidden nerve fibres ever unsuspected yet tremendously potent.”--_Chicago Daily News._ THE PRINCESS CASAMASSIMA. 12mo, $1.25. We find no fault with Mr. Henry James’s “Princess Casamassima.” It is a great novel; it is his greatest, and it is incomparably the greatest novel of the year in our language.... From first to last we find no weakness in the book; the drama works simply and naturally; the causes and effects are logically related; the theme is made literature without ceasing to be life.--_Harper’s New Monthly Magazine, Editor’s Study._ THE REVERBERATOR. 12mo, $1.00. The public will be glad to find Mr. James in his best vein. One is thankful again that there is so brilliant an American author to give us entertaining sketches of life.--_Boston Herald._ THE ASPERN PAPERS, AND OTHER STORIES. 12mo, $1.00. The stories are told with that mastery of the art of story-telling which their writer possesses in a conspicuous degree.--_Literary World._ It is as a short story writer that we think Mr. James appears at his best, and in this volume he may be read in his most attractive and most artistic vein.--_Boston Saturday Evening Gazette._ Mr. Henry James is at his best in “The Aspern Papers.” ... For careful finish, minute analysis, and vivid description of both the scenes and the characters, “The Aspern Papers” may take high rank among Mr. James’s stories.--_Guardian._ PARTIAL PORTRAITS. 12mo, $1.75. Henry James has never appeared to better advantage as an author than in this delightful volume of critical essays.... No one can fail to acknowledge the exquisite charm of style which pervades the book, and the kind appreciation the author evinces of the finer and subtler qualities of the authors with whom he deals.--_Boston Saturday Evening Gazette._ THE BOSTONIANS. 12mo, $1.25. Unquestionably “The Bostonians” is not only the most brilliant and remarkable of Mr. James’s novels, but it is one of the most important of recent contributions to literature.--_Boston Courier._ A LONDON LIFE, AND OTHER STORIES. 12mo, $1.00. His short stories, which are always bright and sparkling, are delightful.... Will bear reading again and again.--_Mail and Express._ FRENCH POETS AND NOVELISTS. 12mo, $1.50. THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK. [ Transcriber’s Note: The following changes have been made to the original text. The first line presents the text as printed in the original, the second the amended text. with regard to certain matters. the question of how long they with regard to certain matters, the question of how long they at random, to the noble spring of the roof. Just look at those at random, to the noble spring of the roof. “Just look at those self as circumstances and experience have made one, and its not my self as circumstances and experience have made one, and it’s not my ]